Chapter One: Thawab al-Muwahhidin wa-al-Arifin. Reward for the
Monotheists and Gnostics - 35 traditions

1. Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Musa ibn Bawayh al-Qummi, (may Allah be pleased
with him) said: Ali ibn al-Husayn, my father (may Allah be pleased with him) said, that
Sa'd ibn Abd Allah on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi said: Abu
Imran al-Ijli said: Muhammad ibn Sinan said: Abu al-Ala al-Khaffaf said: Atiyyah alAwfi on the authority of Abu Sa'id al-Khudri, that

H G " % G " G G2

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "Neither I nor anyone before me has said
anything like: There is no god but Allah' [La ilaha illa Allah]."

2. Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Ahmed ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with him)
said: Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Saffar said: Ibrahim ibn Hashim said on the authority
of al-Husayn ibn Yazid al-Nawfili on the authority of Isma'il ibn Muslim al-Sakuni from
Abu Abd Allah Ja'far ibn Muhammad (AS) on the authority of his father (AS) on the
authority of his forefathers (AS) that

. H G " % G " G 2G G
The Messenger of Allah said: "The best act of service [ibadah] is to say: There is
no god but Allah' [La ilaha illa Allah]."
3. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with him) said:
Sa'd ibn Abd Allah, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Hilal on the authority of al-Hasan ibn
Ali ibn Fuddal, on the authority of Abu Hamzah that

H G H G " % G " G I G Z E 4 G m % G }

G G7 % m 4 %G m H H

Imam Baqir (AS) said: "There is nothing greater in reward than testifying that:
There is no god but Allah [La ilaha illa Allah], because nothing equals Allah, the
Mighty and High, and nobody shares His Power."
4. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkiil (may Allah be pleased with him) said:
Muhammad ibn Ja'far al-Asadi said, that Musa ibn Imran al-NakhaI said, on the
authority of his uncle al-Husayn ibn Yazid l-Nawfili, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Sinan, on the authority of al-Mufaddal ibn Umar that

10

L Z G G G G ! 2 3
H G " G G 2 : G G H G
G7 % G m G% G H G G G E G G G H 2C G E H G G H G
C G % H G " % G

Z G G G 2 H _G o
I I G 2 m G n
G G G I L G G G

.Z G H 3

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Verily, Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, has
given the Believers a gurantee." I asked, "What is it?" He replied, "If a Believer
profess his faith in Allah's Divinity, Muhammad's Prophet hood, and Ali's
Imamate, and carriers out his duties, He guarantees him eternal life in His
Presence [jiwar]." I said: "By Allah! This is a blessing with which none of the
blessings bestowed upon the sons of Adam can compare." Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq
(AS) replied, "They have done little but they have enjoyed much."
5. Ahmed ibn Ziyad ibn Ja'far al-Hamadani (may Allah be pleased with him) said, that
Aliibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of his father, from Muhammad ibn Abu
Umayr, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Ziyad al-Karkhi from Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq
(AS), from his father, from his grandfather, that

. H Z GG G m >

The Messenger of Allah said: "Whoever dies without ascribing a partner to Allah,
will enter Heaven regardless of whether he has done good or evil."
6. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with him) said,
that Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar said, that Muhammd ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu alKhattab on the authority of Ali ibn Abu Hamzah, on the authority of Abu Basir that

2 3 G }

H H G G G7 G G2 G E G G

% G Z G2 G G m G " Z G2 G G m 3H !
.Z G G 3 _ m 3HG G ! 2 3 H G " H

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) explained the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High:
"He is the most entitled to be feared and the most entitled to forgive." He said:
Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, said: I was the most entitled to be feared.
Hence, My Servant should not associate partners with Me. I am the most entitled
to grant Heaven to My Servant, so long as he does not associate partners with
Me. And he (AS) said: "Verily, Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, has taken an
oath by His Dignity and Glory that He will never punish the people who believe in
His Unity with Hell-fire."
11

7. Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Shaybani (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Muhammad
ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said, that Musa ibn Imran al-Nakha'I on the authority of his
uncle al-Husayn ibn Yazid al-Nawfili on the authority of Ali ibn Salim,

G _ H ! 2 3
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Verily, Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, has
forbidden Hell-fire to the bodies of the Monotheists."
8. My father (may Allah be pleased with him) said, that Sa'd ibn Abd Allah, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Sayf, on
the authority of his brother Ali, on the authority of Sayf ibn Amirah said, that al-Hajjaj ibn
Artat related to me, that Abu al-Zubayr on the authority of Jabir ibn Abd Allah that

G G : % H _ G H G G
G ] H G " % G " I m >
H GG G m >

The Prophet (SA) said: "Two events are inevitable: 1) The entry into Heaven of the
person of the person who died witnessing that there is no god but Allah, and 2)The
entry into Hell-fire of the person who died associating partners with Allah."
9. My father, Ali ibn Husayn (may Allah be pleased with him) related to me, that Sa'd ibn
Abd Allah on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa on the authority of alHusayn ibn Sayf, on the authority of his brother, Ali, on the authority of his father, Sayf
ibn Amrah, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn al-Sabbah said, that Anas said:

H G " % G " m E G E H2 C : _ G H G
The Prophet (SA) said: "None but the arrogant and the obstinate1 deny that there is
no god but Allah."
10. Ja'far ibn Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Abd Allah ibn al-Mughayrah al-Kufi (may Allah
be pleased with him) said: al-Hasan (my grandfather) ibn Ali al-Kufi on the authority of
al-Husayn ibn Sayf, on the authority of his brother Ali, on the authority of his father
Sayf ibn Mughayrah on the authority of Amar ibn Shimr, on the authority of Jabir bn
Yazid al-Jufi said

H G " % G " G H G G H G G G!"

.
1

Quran: 14:15.

12

Abu Ja'far al-Baqir (AS) said: Jibra'il came to the Messenger of Allah (SA) and said:
"O Muhammad! Blessed is any member of your Ummah who professes that There is
no god but Allah, Alone, Alone, Alone'."
11. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with him) said:
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa,
on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Abu Jamilah, on the
authority of Jabir said from Abu Abd Allah Ja'far (AS) that

H G " % G " G H G G H G H

The Messenger of Allah said: Jibra'il came to me while I was in between al-Safa and
al-Marwah and said: O Muhammad! Any member of your Ummah who professes
with sincerity that There is not god but Allah Unique' will be blessed."
12. Muhammad ibn Ali (my father) (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Ali ibn al-Hasan
al-Kufi on the authority of his father, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Sayf, on the
authority of his father Sayf ibn Amirah, on the authority of Amar ibn Shimr, on the
authority of Abu Tufayl that

H G " G%G3 _ G E G C 3 E H k
G 3 > G H G " H G " % G " m E G E 2 G : E G
G G I G G G!" G 3 H I
.
G >
Ali (AS) said: A Muslim servant has only to say the words There is no god but
Allah,' and they ascend (to Allah), breaking through physical barriers. As they do so,
they obliterate his sins as they pass them by, stopping only when they reach his
good deeds.
13. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with him) said:
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar reported, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah
al-Barqi on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Sayf, on the authority of his brother Ali, on the
authority of al-Mufaddal ibn Salih on the authority of Ubayd ibn Zurarah that

.G H H G " % G " G G 2
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The statement There is no god but Allah' is the
price of Heaven."

13

14. Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Qummi (my father) (may Allah be pleased with him) related us that
Sad ibn Abd Allah reported, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the
authority of al-Husayn ibn Sayf, on the authority of Sulayman ibn Amr said: Imran ibn
Abu Ata' said: Ata' related on the authority of Ibn Abbas that

m E 2 G H G " % G " G G H H G G!" qH G G G : _ G H G

H G% L 3 % > 3 H G " } %3 I G C H G " % G "
I 3 G

The Prophet (SA) said: There is no statement more loved by Allah, the Mighty and
High, than There is no god but Allah.' There is not a single servant (of Allah) who
pronounces these words but that his sins are dispersed under his feet like the
leaves of a tree are scattered beneath it.
15. Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Tamim al-Sarkhasi, the jurist of Sarkhas, said:
Abu Labib Muhammad ibn Harun ibn Abd Allah al-Jammal on the authority of Abu
Ayyub said: Qudamah ibn Muhraz al-Ashja'I related to me that Makhramah ibn Bukayr
ibn Abd Allah ibn al-Ashajj, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Abu Harb
ibn Zayd ibn Khalid al-Juhani related to me that I bear witness on my father, Zayd ibn
Kahlid, that I heard him say

G H G " % G " % H

The Messenger of Allah (SA) sent me on my way saying, "Give glad tidings to the
people! Whoever says, there is no god but Allah, Alone, who has no partners' will
have Heaven as his reward."
16. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Ali ibn
al-Husayn al-Sadabadi said: Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi said on the authority
of his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ziyad, on the authority of Aban and
others, that

G % G % G % G 2H E G E E G E G % G G G H G

H G " % G " I G H G

Al-Sadiq (AS) reported, "Whoever breaks his fast with virtuous words or a virtuous
deed, Allah will accept his fast. He was asked: "O son of the Messenger of Allah!
What are the virtuous words?" He replied, "The virtuous words are bearing witness
that there is no god but Allah.' And the virtuous deed is giving the (zakat of) Fitrah."
17. Abu Mansur Ahmed ibn Ibrahim ibn Bakr al-Khuri said in Naysabur, that Abu Ishaq Ibrahim
ibn Muhammadibn Harun al-Khuri said: Ja'far ibn Muhammad ibn Ziyad al-Faqih al-Khuri said:
14

Ahmad ibn Abd Allah al-Juyibari known as al-Hirawi, and al-Niharawani and al-Shaybani said
on the authority of al-Rida Ali ibn Musa (AS), on the authority of his father on the authority of
his forefathers on the authority of Ali (AS) that

. H H G " G G H G G% H H Y G
The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "The one whom Allah has blessed with belief in
Divine Unity shall have Heaven as his reward."
18. With same chain of narrators as above that

H q Z G I H H G o

G H G " % G " H G " G

The Messenger of Allah said: "Verily, there is no god but Allah,' is a glorious and noble
saying about Allah, the Mighty, the High. Whoever says it sincerely merits Heaven."
19. And as the above chain of narrators that

H G G%G G G7 L EI E G E G7 H G " % G " G

.>
The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "Be it day or night, anyone who professes that
There is no god but Allah' will have all his evil deeds erased from his book (of
reckoning)."
20. And the same chain of narrators that

G L 3 % E 3 G Z H H H G " G

H 3 H H G " % G " 2 G (R)
>

I ! 2 3 I G GO G }

! 2 3
.I G GO G > }

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: Verily, Allah has a pillar of ruby, the top of which is
under the Throne, and the bottom of which is on the back of the fish which swims in the
Seventh Earth, which is the lowest. When a servant of Allah says: there is no god but
Allah.' The Throne trembles, and both the pillar and fish move. So Allah, the Blessed,
and the Most High says: O Throne of Mine! Remain calm!' Then it replies, How shall I
remain calm, when you have not forgiven the one who uttered those words?' Then
Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, announces: O inhabitants of My Heavens! Bear
witness that indeed, I have pardoned the one who has uttered these words.'
15

21. Abu al-Husayn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Shah a jurist at Marw al-Rawdh said: Abu Bakr
Muhammad ibn Ad Allah al-Naysaburi said: Abu al-Qasim Abd Allah ibn Ahmad ibn
Abbas al-Ta'i said in Basra, that: My father related to me in the year 260 (AH) that: Ali ibn
Musa al-Rida (AS) related to me in the year 194 (AH) that: My father Musa ibn Ja'far (AS)
related to me that: My father Ja'far ibn Muhammad (AS) related to me that: My father
Muhammad ibn Ali (AS) related to me that: My father Ali ibn al-Husayn related to me that:
My father al-Husayn ibn Ali (AS) related to me that: My father Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS)
related to that

.G G G % GG H G " % G " % H m G
The Messenger of Allah (SA): "Allah, Glorified be He, said: There is no god but Allah' is
My Fortress. Whoever enter it is save from My Chastisement."
22. Abu Sa'id Muhammad ibn al-Fadl ibn Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Mudhakkar al-Naysaburi
said in Naysabur, that Abu Ali al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Khazraji al-Ansari al-Sadi related tome
that Abd al-Salam ibn Salih Abu al-Salt al-Hirawi said I was with Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS)
when he was setting off for his journey fro Naysabur and was riding a grey coloured mule,
while Muhammad ibn Rafi, Ahmad ibn Harb, Yahya ibn Yahya, Ishaq ibn Rahawayh, and a
number of other scholars were holding on to the bridle of his mule in Marba'ah. Thus, they
all requested: "With respect to your pure forefathers, relate to us a tradition that you have
heard from your father." He leaned his head out of the camel-borne sedan, and he was
wearing a woven fabric gown with two designs.

H 2 H

G _ G L : C G I GL H E G G

GE H G (R) 2 I Z q G G

G HI G O$ _ G G G G G H G G G G

G H 2

C G G GH G G G G

EqG G C G G GH G H G

G I G G G~ 2 H G " % G" ~G" % H m H G H L G

G G G H G " % G "

He said: My father, the Pious Servant (of Allah) [al-Abd al-Saleh], Musa ibn Ja'far,
related to me that; My father, Ja'far ibn Muhammad related to me that: My father,
Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (Opener of the Knowledge of the Prophets)
related to me that: My father, Ali ibn al-Husayn the Master of Servants of Allah
related to me that: My father, the Master of the youth of Heaven al-Husayn related
16

that : The Prophet said: Allah, Glorified be He, said: "Verily, I am Allah, and there is
no god but Me; therefore, serve Me. Whoever bears true witness that There is no
god but Allah' shall enter my Fortress, and whoever enters My Fortress is safe from
My Chastisement."
23. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Abu al-Husayn Muhammad ibn Jafar
al-Asadi said: Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Sufi said: Yusub ibn Aqil on the authority of
Ishaq ibn Rahwayh said

G _ G 7 H : G% G

G G _ G G L G m G H G G L G m E G H G L G m
G O L G m G L G m EqG G H G GG G G L G m EqG
G H H G G G H G " % G " m % H
>
L G m

When Abu al-Hasan al-Risa (AS) reached Naysabur, and intended to go from there to
al-Ma'mum, some traditionists met him. They asked him, "O son of the Messenger of
Allah! You are gong from us without relating any Hadith to us so that we can derive
benefit from you." He was sitting in a camel-borne sedan, so he leaned his head out,
and replied: I heard my father, Musa ibn Ja'far say: I heard my father Ja'far ibn
Muhammad say: I heard my father Muhammad ibn Ali say: I heard my father Ali ibn
Husayn say: I heard my father Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib say: I heard my father
the Commander of the faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) say: I heard the Messenger of
Allah (SA) say: I heard Jibra'il say: I heard Allah, Exalted be His Glory, say, There is
no god but Allah' is my Fortress. Whoever enters My Fortress is safe from My
Chastisement." When the camel passed by, he (AS) called out to us, "That is subject
to conditions. And I am among its conditions."
The Compiler of this book explains: Among the conditions (of the statement; there is no
god but Allah) is the acknowledgment that Al-Rida (AS) is an Imam appointed by Allah, the
Mighty and High, over the people [ibad], and the one to whom obedience is due.
24. Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Tamim al-Sarkhasi said: Hariz on the authority of
Abd al-Aziz, on the authority of Zayd ibn Wahb, on the authority of Abu Dharr (may Allah
have mercy upon him) that I went out one night.

Y G " % G G G (R) G! H G Z L #

G G H G " Z % L E G

G Z % L Z G%G G G G % G Z
H G H G G! G % E G7 G

G " ~ G " m G 2 % G ~G" H 2 d _ 3
H qG G G7 % _ 3 G G G H G L
Z G G C Z L G ~G(R) G {

G O

. (c)

The Messenger of Allah (SA) was all alone. I thought that he was averse to anyone
walking with him. When I started walking in the moon light, he turned around and
saw me. He enquired, "What is that?" I answered, "Abu Dharr. May Allah make me
your ransom!" He (SA) saiome here, O Abu Dharr!" So I walked with him for
some time. He said: Verily, the ones with much will be the ones with less. On the
Day of Resurrection with the exception of those Allah has favoured. His Favour will
spread to them from right to left, and from front to back. It will fill them with good.
Abu Dharr says: I continued to walk with him for a while. Then he (SA) said: "Sit
down here. He made me sit down in some low ground around which was stones." He
said to me, "Sit down until I return to you." He (Abu Dharr) said: He went to a stony
area until I could no longer see him. His delay was prolonged. Then I heard him
coming, while saying, "Even if he fornicated and eve if he stole?" He said: When he
came back, I immediately asked him, "O Prophet of Allah! May Allah make me your
ransom! Who are you talking to in the stony area for I did not hear anyone answer
you?" He replied, "It was Jibra'il who appeared to me in that stony area and said:
Glad tidings to your Ummah that anyone who dies without associating anything
with Allah, the Mighty and High, will enter Heaven." He (SA) added, "I asked Jibra'il:
Even if he fornicated and even if he stole?' He replied: Yes, and even if he drank
wine.'"
The Compiler of this book says: What he means by this is that he will succeed in
repentance so that he may enter Paradise.
25. Abu al-Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ghalib al-Anmati
said: Abu Amr Ahmad ibn Al-Hasna ibn Ghazwan said: Ibrahim ibn Ahmad said: Dawud
ibn Amr said: Abd Allah ibn Jafar on the authority of Zayd ibn Aslam, on the authority of
Ata' ibn Yasar, on the authority of Abu Hurayrah that
18

Z H G " G m G C G!" G

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "When a man lies on his back, contemplates the
sky and the stars, and says: By Allah! Verily, you have a Lord who is your Creator.
O Allah! Forgive me!' Then Allah, the Mighty and High, looks down upon him with
mercy, and forgives him."
The Compiler of this book says: Allah, the Mighty and High, has already said: Or look they
not into the Kingdom of the Heavens and the Earth and whatever things Allah created.
What is meant by this is either: Have they not contemplated the Kingdom of the Heaven
and the Earth, and the wonders of their creation?' or Have they not contemplated these
things like people of reason, and reflected upon them?' If they did, they would know that
Allah, the Mighty and High, made the Heavens and the Earth with greatness: they are
supported without pillars, and they are tranquilized without any tool.
He created the Heavens and the Earth so that people could ponder upon their Creator,
their Master, and their Manager. He created them so that people would know that He does
not resemble anything, including what the unbelievers have taken as gods other than Allah,
the Mighty and High. Matter does not have to power to hold the tiniest of particles in air
without a pillar or tool Through such comparisons people recognize that Allah is the
Creator of the Heavens, the Earth, and of all bodies. They also recognize that nothing in
Allah's Realm or Kingdom resembles Him.
He is the Owner of the Heavens and the Earth. It is He who has power over them. He has
created the Heavens and the Earth so that people can contemplate them and witness that
they are the creations of Allah, the Mighty and High. In so doing, they realize that Allah, the
Mighty and High, is their Master. They realize that Allah has power over them since they
form part of His Belongings, and His Creation. They are part and parcel of His
Omnipotence, Authority, and Ownership.
It is through the vision of the Heavens and the Earth, and the creation of Allah, that people
realize that Allah has power over them since Allah, the Mighty, and High, does not create
but what He owns, and what He has power over. His Word: And whatever things Allah
created,1 refer to various types of creation. Through introspection, people can reason that
since Allah is their Creator, He is more worth of Lordship than the recently created celestial
bodies.
26. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah on the authority of Yaqub ibn Yazid, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Humran that

H H H G " % G " 3 % G " H Z G H G " % G " : G G 2 G

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 7:185.

19

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said, "Whoever sincerely says: there is no god but
Allah,' will enter Heaven. If the person is sincere, the profession there is no god but
Allah' will refrain him from whatever Allah, the Mighty and High, has forbidden."
27. My father related us that Sad ibn Abd Allah on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Isa and Husayn ibn Ali al-Kufi and Ibrahim ibn Hashim all of which said on the authority of
al-Husayn ibn Sayf on the authority of Sulayman ibn Amr on the authority of Muhajjir ibn
Husayn ibn Zayd ibn Arqam who said that

H H H G " % G " 3 % G " H Z G H G " % G " : _ G H G

The Messenger of Allah said: "Whoever sincerely says: There is no god but Allah'
will enter Heaven. If the person is sincere, the profession there is no god but Allah'
will refrain him from whatever Allah, the Mighty and High, has forbidden."
28. Abu Ali al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Amr al-Attar said in Balkh, that
Muhammad ibn Mahud said: Humran on the authority of Malik ibn Ibrahim ibn Tihman on
the authority of [Abu] Hasin on the authority of al-Aswad ibn Hilal on the authority of
Muadh ibn Jabl who said

G 2G H H G C G 3 _ G H

H Z G%G G m G 2G H H G C G % L Z I m

% L G G " H H G G 2G C G 3
. H I G I _ m

I was with the Messenger of Allah and he (SA) said to me, "O Muadh! Do you know
what is the right of Allah, the Mighty and High, upon His Servants?" He (SA)
repeated this three times. I (respectfully) answered," Allah and His Messenger know
best." The Messenger of Allah said: "The right of Allah, the Mighty and High, upon
His Servants is that they should not associate anything with Him." After that he
asked, "Do you know what the right of the servants is upon Allah, the Mighty and
High, when they respect His Right?" I answered again, "Allah and His Messenger
know best." He (SA) said: "That He should not chastise them." Or he (SA) said:
"That He should not place them in Hell."
29. Abu Ahmad al-Hasan ibn Abd Allah ibn Said al-Askari said: Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Humran al-Qishiri said: Abu al-Jarish Ahmad ibn Isa al-Kilabi said: Musa ibn Ismail ibn
Musa ibn Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) said in
the year 250 (AH), that: My father related to me on the authority of his father who on the
20

authority of his grandfather Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) said: Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS)
from his forefathers that

H G " m G L G G G H G " G G H G G G7 E G
. H H G " G G H G G% L Y H H
Ali (AS) reported the following regarding the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: "Is
the reward of goodness aught but goodness:" I heard the Messenger of Allah (SA)
say, "Allah, the Mighty and High, has said: The one whom I have blessed with belief
in Divine Unity will have nothing but Heaven as his reward."
30. Al-Hakim Abd al-Hamid ibn Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Husayn said: Abu Yazid ibn Mahbub
al-Muzni said: al-Husayn ibn Isa al-Bastami said: Abd al-Samad ibn Abd al-Warith said:
Shubah on the authority of Khalid al-Hadhdha' on the authority of Abu Bushr Anbari on
the authority of Humran on the authority of Uthman ib Affan said

H H m >

The Messenger of Allah (SA) saie who dies knowing that Allah is the Truth
[Haqq] will enter Heaven."

31. Hamzah ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Jafar ibn Zayd ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn
Abu Talib (AS) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim Ibn Hashim related to me that Ibrahim Ibn Ishaq alNahawandi on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Hammad al-Ansari on the authority of alHusayn ibn Yahya ibn al-Husayn on the authority of Amr ibn Talhah on the authority of
Asbat ibn Abu Nasr on the authority of Ikrimah on the authority of Ibn Abbas related to me
that

G G H H G " Z Z _ GH G _ m Z G _ G G G H G

C G G7 I > E G ! 2 3 G G

G 3

C G G7 _ H H G 3

G 3
G 3

L H G " % G " > {

G 3

21

H G % G " GG G G!
_ G G H G!" qH Z L G! G HG G G O % H
. H G 2G G GG 3 GH G G
The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: I swear by Him who has sent me with the Truth as
a bearer of glad tidings! Allah will never punish those who believe in His Unity.
Verily, those who believe in Divine Unity will be granted the right to intercede (on the
Day of Judgement), and their intercession will be accepted. After that he (SA)
added, On the Day of Judgement, Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, will order that a
group of evil doers from this world be cast into Hell. They will plead to Him, O our
Lord! How can You cast us into Hell when we used to accept Your Unity? How can
You burn our tongues in the fire when they used to profess Your Unity? How can
You burn our hearts in the fire when they believed that There is no god, but You'?1
How can You burn our faces when we placed our foreheads on the dust in
prostration for You? How can You burn our hands when we lifted them up in prayers
to You? Allah, Mighty be His Glory, will say, "O My Servants! You committed evil
deeds in the world. Hence, you have earned the punishment of Hell-fire." They will
then plead, "O our Lord! Are our mistakes greater than Your forgiveness? Or is Your
forgiveness greater than our mistakes?" Then Allah, the Mighty and High, will reply,
"My Forgiveness, of course." They will ask, "What is greater? Your Mercy or our
sins?" So He, the Mighty and High, will answer, "My Mercy, of course." They will
then ask, What is greater? Our belief in Your Unity or our sins?" He, the Mighty and
High, will reply, "Your acceptance of My Unity is greater, of course." Then they will
say, "O Our Lord! Then let You Forgiveness and Mercy encompass us as it
encompasses everything." Hence, Allah, Mighty be His Glory, will say, O My Angels!
I swear by My Dignity and Glory! I have not created anyone more beloved to Me that
the ones who embrace My Unity professing that here is no god but Me. Since I
refuse to cast those who believe in My Unity into Hell, enter Ye, O My Servants, in
Heaven!
32. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said: al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Sakkari said: Muhammad ibn
Zakariyya al-Jawhari al-Basri said: Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Umarah on the authority of
his father who on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ali (AS) on the authority of his father Ali ibn al-Husayn (AS) on the
authority of his father al-Husayn ibn Ali on the authority of his father Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS)
Said

. H Z GG G m >

The Messenger of Allah (SA) saie who dies without associating anything with
Allah will enter Heaven, whether he did good or evil."

1

Translators Note: Quran 21:87

22

33. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi on the
authority of his father Muhammad ibn Abu -Umayr on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim
and Aby Ayyub said

E H OG H G " % G " G G 2

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (AS) saie who says, there is no god but Allah' one
hundred times will be the best of the people in deeds on that day, unless someone
says it more often than he does."
34. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Hilal on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Salih on the authority of Isa ibn Abd Allah who is from the children of Umar ibn Ali,
on the authority of his forefathers on the authority of Abu Said al-Khudri said

H G >

G % H : _ G H G

The Messenger of Allah said: Allah Mighty be His Glory said to Musa (AS), "O Musa!
If everything that exists in all the heavens, their inhabitants, and the seven earths,
were places in one side of the scale, and there is no god but Allah' was placed in
the other side, then there is not god but Allah' would tip the scale."

35. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa
on the authority of Abd al-Rahman ibn Abu Najran on the authority of Abd al -Aziz alAbdi on the authority of Umar ibn Yazid that

G H G " % G " I E G7 m % G G G2 G

G Z % H H q Z Z 2G G H Z

G Z G H G7 % E _ G

.G H G7 Z % Z H

I heard Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (AS) say, In a day, whoever says "I bear witness that
there is no god but Allah, the One and Only, who has no partners; the God [ilah], the
One [wahid], the Unique [ahad], on whom all depend, who has not taken a partner
nor son," Allah, the Mighty and High, will record 45 million goods deeds fro him; He
will forgive him 45 million evil deeds; He will raise his position in Heaven by 45
million places; He will give him the blessings of a person who recited the entire
Quran twelve times; and Allah will build a house for him in Heaven.

23

Chapter Two: Al-Tawhid wa Nafy al-Tashbih - Divine Unity and
Negation of Anthropomorphism - 37 traditions

1. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah on the
authority of his father Muhammad Khalid Barqi; on the authority of Ahmad ibn Nadr and
others; on the authority fo Amr ibn Thabit; on the authority of a man who he named on the
authority of Abu Ishaq Safii; on the authority of al-Harith al -Awar who said

G Z 2 Z EqG G C G GG G q :

G " % H G GG G o

E G G " G E d G7E H % H G % 2GO G 3 >

GZ Z 2 _ G% m Z G Z

% G 3
G G G7 I G G H G7 % L G H GZ O I G G

% H L % G 2 m

G G G G G7 I G >

% G GLG G H G G H >

n
G _ G G%G3G G% L H % E G E G % G

G H G%G3 G HI G H % 3 G
>
G IG G 3 2G G G H G%G G 4 G G
% H G " H Z G Z OG2

G G I G G%G G G GG #

G G1/4
CE 3 G G G G3 E C 3 G GG G G H G _ G ..
I % G E G I G q
G I G E 2 3 G G G G! E G

GL 3 % H 3 H 3 H G % G _ G!" G %

1/2
> *
G%G G " L H G%G3G > Y G%G G

24

G G % G I G E 4 _ G G H 4 % G m E 4 _ #
G G E 4 _ 2 G H GG O
H G7 G H H % C 3 G % G 3 I G" E G G G G G G G

E 2 E G G I _ G G % G G
G G G _ G G H G Y G " d Y G G%

Y I _ G%GO Y G G I _ G G G G G G % G G IG H 3 % H G G G

G _ G G%G Y G G G G
H G " % G " I Y H G L GH

G G%G G H G G%G I Z G G% b _ G % % 2 Z H H

3/4
G m Z o

H G C G G G dZ G Z H Z G Z 3/4

H G n

G n
. G!

G H HG" H I G HG"

One day, the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) gave a sermon after
Asr (afternoon) prayer. The people were astonished by the beautiful words with
which he praised Allah, Exalted be His Majesty.
Abu Ishaq said: I asked Harith, "Did you not memorize it?" He answered, "I wrote it
down." So he dictated it to us from his script:
All praise belongs to Allah for Who does not die, and Whose wonders shall never
come to an end. He exercises His (Universal) Power everyday, creating things that
did not exist before; Who does not beget any who could claim to share in His Glory
and Might; and Who is not begotten to die so that He could leave an heir behind. He
is beyond all imagination; hence, He cannot be regarded as a visible shape.
He is too far beyond the reach of sight to leave any mental impression of Him. His
Beginning has no beginning, and His End has no end. Time does not outlast Him.
Excess and loss cannot affect Him. He cannot be described in terms of when, what
and where. He is Hidden among the hidden. He is Manifest in the mind through His
Signs, and through His Wisdom in His Creation.
When questioned about Him, the prophets did not describe Him in terms of any limit,
scope, extent or in terms of constituents. Rather, they described Him in terms of His
Functions, and they led people towards Him through His Signs. The minds of the
intellectuals do not dare deny His Existence. There can be no denying the Might of
the Creator of the heavens and the Earth, and all that is between them. He is totally
distinct from His Creation. Nothing resembles Him. He brought His Creation into
25

existence so that He would be obeyed and worshipped. He gave human beings the
strength to serve Him, and he rebutted their excuses through the best of arguments.
Thus, whoever meets his doom does so knowingly and justifiably. It is through His
Grace that redemption is secured by the redeemed, and it is Allah's Grace that
prevails in this life and the life to come. Then, Allah to Whom all praise is due,
inaugurated the function of this worldly life with His Own Praise, and wound up the
function of this worldly life, and the next life, whit His Own Praise. As He Himself
says: And judgment shall be given between them with justice, and it shall be said:
All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
All praise is due to Allah Who, despite having no body, has adorned Himself with the
Robes of Greatness and Grandeur, and has covered Himself with the Mantle of Awe
and Reverence, without having any corporal form. He occupies the Celestial Throne
unceasingly. He is far above His Creation, without being far, and without being in
mutual contact with them. Neither has He any limit which may end in any limit, nor is
there anything like Him through which He can be recognized.
Whoever claims to be holy, except Him, is bound to be humiliated. Whoever
magnifies himself is bound to be humbled. All thins bow before His Greatness and
are obedient to His Lordship and Might. The function of the eyes becomes tired in
searching for Him. The imagination is unable to reach His Attributes. He existed
before any beginning, and nothing preceded Him. He is the Last of All, and there is
no last for Him at all. With His Might He holds sway over all things. He observes all
places without making any movement. No touch can ever touch Him nor can any
sense ever sense Him. And He it is Who is Allah in Heavens and Allah in the Earth;
and He is the Wise, the knowing.1
Whatever He intended to create He planned for it soundly and correctly without
there being any example of it before, and without being tired thereby (in creating
whatever He wanted to create). He started whatever He needed to start, and made
whatever He wanted to make. He intended to create two weights, the jinn and
humankind, so that they should recognize His Lordship on the basis of all these
means (of revealed wisdom in His Creation referred to above), and be able to obey
Him (consciously).
We glorify Allah with all words of praise for the bounties He has bestowed. And we
seek guidance from Him in our righteous affairs. Furthermore, we seek refuge from
Him against our misdeeds. We solicit His Forgiveness for our past sins. We bear
witness that there is no god but Allah, and that Muhammad (SA) in His Servant and
Messenger whom Allah raised with truth, who leads to Allah, and who guides
towards Him.
Thus, He rescued us from misguidance through him, guiding us to the right path,
and through him freed us from ignorance. Hence, whoever obeys Allah and His
Messenger, he indeed achieves a mighty success,2 and has secured divine
blessings in abundance. And whosoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger surely
suffers a manifest loss, and deserves a humbling chastisement.
Hence, strive to listen, obey counsel with sincerity, and share the burden with others
effectively and gracefully. Help yourself by sticking to the right path, and in avoiding
wicked deeds. Give to others what is right, and take from others what is right.
Cooperate with me (the Imam) by means of these tasks. Seize the idiotic oppressor,
tie him, and bind him. Promote the good, and prohibit the evil. Learn to appreciate
the worth of illustrious people. May Allah keep us secure and steady on the right
path, and keep us constant in abstaining from evil! I beg Allah for our forgiveness!
1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 43:84.
Translator's Note: Quran: 33:71.

26

2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (May Allah be pleased with him) said:
Muhammad ibn Amr al-Katib, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ziyad al-Qalzumi, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Ziyad al-Jiddi, the one who lead the prayers at Jiddah,
that Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn Umar ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) related to me that I heard
Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) say this about the Unity (of Allah) in the presence of alMamum, Ibn Abu Ziyad said: their freed slave and maternal uncle to some of them,
Ahmad ibn Abd Allah al- Alawi also related it to me, on the authority of al-Qasim ibn
Ayyub al- Alawi that

_ G G ~G" E G G G _ G m H

% GZ Z ! 3 E G G G G
G G G E G % 3 d 2 C m G G 3d Z

% G G G 2G H H G%G G G%_ G H G%
G G 3 G G 3

E E G H H G G I G % >

G G I G G G G G I G G
G H HG" % 3 G%G H G
G G G G G G G G G

E C % H 3 HG" % H H 3 % % IH 2

G % H L 2 3 G G

G % G m G G G% C m G G G

_G G % G I G HG" G I H _G" %

G G I G G%G G HG" G G G G G E

G % I G % 3 G I % G2

% I G d % G H % G

H H HI G " % H G % H % H
H G%G % % H H H

2 G Gd G G E G Gd G G G G G H G GG Y G

G E G G 2 E G G E G I G

>

_ C 3 >

2 > _

G G GG G % G G % >

G *
H G 2 G G I 2 G G
H H % G IG _ G I G }_ I G m}
G G Z H IG 3 G 3G

% 2 G E E 2 I G }

o
3 H G 4 _ G
L IG G G Z G IG 3G G > IG 3 G Z H G_ G A

G" G H G C % I %
G G E I q IG _ G

G G G G d G IG G

G H G OG2 G%G G (R)G G G H

G I Y > C 3 H G" % G G
% % _ 3 H %2 3 G%G 3
GH I H H G G I G I I G G G7 G G O G!"

G q I G G G I G Y H 3 H I G G2 L
d L 2 3 I G }_ L L
H G I G L G 2 IG 3 I G" G C

G G G H G " G G G H G " G G%G G

28

G _ >

G G%G G C G G7 C G%G H G >

G G % I H % 3 L 3

C % G Z G" H % G G % H

Z G H G $ G%G L Z G" G Y G G G G

% G7 % G d G7 H G G G7

G G C G H G " % G " 2 % H _ G ! G G G
.
G G H G2_ G H E H H Z G Z 3/4 3/4

When al-Mamum wanted to appoint al-Rida (AS) to the Caliphate, he gathered the
Hashimites and said: I want to appoint al-Rida as the Caliph after me."
The Hashimites envied him because of this and said: "Are you going to hand over
political and religious authority to an ignorant man who has no idea of how to run
the Caliphate? Have him summoned before us so that you can see his ignorance,
and then you can judge what we affirm."
Therefore, he sent someone to summon him. The Hashimites said to him (AS): "O
Abu al-Hasan! Go up to the pulpit, and give us an example of how we should serve
Allah."
Hence he (AS) climbed up the pulpit, sat down, and lowered his head for some time
without saying anything. He (AS) then rose up, stood up straight, praised Allah and
extolled Him, and sent blessings on the Prophet and his Household (AS).
He (AS) then said:
The best of service is to acknowledge the existence of Allah. The foundation of
acknowledgement of Allah is to process His unity. Allah's Unity is established
through the denial of descriptions, since all intellects bear witness that descriptions
are created, and whatever is created requires a Creator, who is neither identifier or
identified. Every identifier and identified is connected, and connection is evidence of
occurrence.
Whatever occurs cannot be eternal. Hence, anyone who describes Allah in
anthropomorphic terms has not described Allah's Essence. Furthermore, anyone
who describes Allah by means of reason has not described Him. Anyone who
equates Him with anything has not described the Reality. Anyone who limits Allah
has not recognized Him. Anyone who seeks to point Him out has not approached
Him. Anyone who describes Allah in human terms has not described Him. Anyone
who divides Allah into parts has not drawn near Him. And anyone who imagines
Allah has intended other than Him.
Everything which is known is in itself created. Every existence other than Him is
caused. The existence of Allah is inferred through His Creation. The existence of
Allah is acknowledged by means of the intellect. The existence of Allah is proven
29

through nature. Allah placed the creation as a veil between the Creator and the
created. Allah differs from creation by means of His Distinction. He gave a beginning
to everything so that everything would know that He ha no beginning, and so that
everything would know that those who have a beginning are incapable of giving a
beginning to others. He gave movement to everything so that everything would
know that He is devoid of movement, because movement is a manifestation of need.
His Names are interpretations. His Actions are instructions. His Essence is a fact.
The Core of His Essence is a distinction between Him and His Creation. And His
Elapses [ghubur] are limitations for all but Him. Verily, whoever describes Allah is
ignorant of Him. Anyone who attempts to encompass Him has totally missed Him.
And anyone who thinks that He can be grasped in His Entirety has totally mistaken
Him.
Anyone who asks, "How is He?" has compared Him. Anyone who asks, "Why does
He exist?" implies that He is caused. Anyone who asks, "How long has He existed?"
has subjected Him to the limits of time. He who asks, "In what is He?" implies that
He is contained. He who asks, "What is His Extent?" has limited Him. He who asks,
"How far does He reach?" has raised Him, and whoever raises Him, implies that He
has a limit. Whoever gives Allah an extent implies that He has parts. Whoever claims
that Allah has parts has described Him. Whoever describes Him has disbelieved in
Him.
Allah is not subject to change like creation is subject to change. In the same way, He
is not limited like the limitations of the limited. He is One, but not in the sense of a
number. He is Apparent, but not in the sense of pursuit. He is Evident, but not in the
sense of sight. He is Hidden, but not in the sense of pursuit. He is Far, but not in the
sense of distance. He is Near, but not in the sense of closeness. He is Subtle, but
not in the sense that He has a body. He is Existent, but not in the sense that He
comes from non-existence.
He is a Doer, but not by means of compulsion. He is the Appraiser, but not by means
of thought. He is the Controller (of the Universe), buy not by means of movement. He
is the One who Wills, but not by means of soliciting. He is the One who Wills, but not
in the sense that He is eager. He is the Perceiver, but not by means of touch. He is
All-Hearing, but not by means of any instrument. He is All-Seeing, but not by means
of any tool.
Time cannot be associated with Him. Space does not contain Him. Slumber does not
seize Him. Attributes do not limit Him. Tools do not bind Him. His Essence
supersedes time. His Existence supersedes non-existence. His Eternity supersedes
beginning. By giving senses to other, He proves that He is devoid of sense. By
creating substance, He proves that He is not a substance. By giving contrasts, He
proves that He has no contrast. By establishing pairs in creation, He proves that He
has not partner.
Light is the opposite of darkness like certainty is the opposite of uncertainty.
Dryness is the opposite of wetness as cold is the opposite of heat. By creating
similarity, Allah points out that He is the Creator. By creating difference, Allah points
out that He is the Differentiator. As the Might and High has said: And of everything
We have created pairs that you may be mindful.1 Therefore, He differentiated
between the prior and the subsequent to prove that nothing precedes Him, and that
nothing succeeds Him.
Everything that has an instinct bears witness that the One who gave them their
instinct ha no instinct. Everything that is different bears witness that the One who
made the different is devoid of differences. Everything that is subjected to time
1

Translator's Note: Quran: 51:49.

30

bears witness the One who subjected them to time is not subject to time. Everything
that is veiled bears witness that the only veil which exists between them and the
One who veiled them is themselves.
Allah was Lord even when there were no subjects. He was the One and Only True
God even when no creation existed. He was All-Knowing even when there was
nothing to be known. He was the Creator even before the creation existed. He was
the All-Hearing even when there was nothing to be heard. He did not earn the title of
Creator merely because of creation. He did not earn the title of Creator merely
because he gave the created a beginning.
And how could it be otherwise when the conjunction since' [mudh] does not make
Him obscure? The word may' [qad] does not approach Him. The expression
perhaps' [laalla] does not veil Him. The conjunction when' [mata] does not set a
time limit for Him. The expression at the time when' [hina] does not comprise Him.
The word with' [maa] does not unite Him with anything. Verily, particles bind
together, and tools point to things similar to themselves to show their effectiveness.
The conjunction since' prevents Him from being without beginning. The word may'
prevents Him from being eternal. The conjuction if not' [law la] prevents Him from
being Complete; thus indicating division.
Difference is manifest through opposition, making its Creator evident to the intellect
while being concealed fro sight. When Allah is imagined, other than Him is
imagined. Difference points to Him. Through difference, verification is introduced,
and through difference, the intellect confirms the belief in Allah Through verification
faith is complete. There is no profession of faith without recognition, and no
recognition without sincerity. There is no sincerity in anthropomorphism. And there
is no negation (of Truth) through the affirmation of anthropomorphism.
Hence, whatever is found in creation is not found in the Creator, and whatever is
possible in creation is impossible to the Creator. Motion and stillness do not occur
in Him. And how can something He executed occur in Him? And how can something
He originated return to Him? If this were the case, His Essence would have contrast,
His Essential Being would be divided into parts, and He could not be called "without
beginning." And since the creator differs from the created, if He is restricted with the
word behind' then He will be restricted with the word in front.' If you seek to
complete Him, then you imply that He is deficient. How can He be Eternal if it is
implied that He has a beginning? How can He give existence if He has been created?
If any sign of creation exists in Him that would deny Him. If any sign of creation
existed in Him, He would surely be subject to change. However, there is no evidence
that He is subject to change. There are no answers to questions about Him. No
reverence for Him can be found in meaning. There was no injustice in manifesting
Himself to creation. The Eternal cannot be divided into "two" and the One without a
Beginning cannot have a beginning. There is no god but Allah, the Greatest, and the
Most High. Whoever gives partner to Allah is a liar, who is lead far astray, and who is
in manifest loss. May Allah bless the Prophet Muhammad and His Noble and Pure
Progeny!
3. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on him)
said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said; and (also) Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn
Zakariyya al-Qittan, on the authority of Bakr ibn Abd Allah ibn Habib, on the authority of
Tamim ibn Buhlul, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Abu Muawiyah, on the
authority of al-Hasan ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Abu Abd Allah (AS) on the authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather (AS)
that
31

H I GG G H G _ G%G G G 2 G G%G

E 4 G G H G }_ G H G G G Z 2G

% 3
E 4 G

H >
H % A
m 3 G % L % G GL

>

L % G H ! G G % G G I % 2 G H 2 G

2 L Y

2 G G I Z G I H H % Y
2

% 2

G O I G I d G O I G I2 G G % Z G"

G % m % G % I % G I G % 2 % H G %

C G >

_ G H H G I G G G G E G I G E 4 C

E 4 d
H E I G G E G C E 4 G E 4 G E 4 G G C Eq Y

G%G G I _ 2 I G % G Z G I G G I G 2 Z G G G H I
E E G H G G I _ I G G3
E G E G EG E G E G E Y E G

2

G C H G G G x G E G E G

C G H 3 G G G G% L E I 2
32

G G 3_ G G G H G H 3 G G H G H H GH G G % Y
G G G G % G C G H H G _ G H H I 3
Z G G H G G G G G G H G m

GE G H G " % G "
G G G m G G H G

G 2 G G I G H Z G2 Z

G H m H ! H E G % H

E H G E GH E H G

G G 2 G G%G G H G2 _ GH L

G 2

H I H G 2 G G I G q GG G H G _ G%G E H G }

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) roused the people to was with Muawiyah for
the second time. When the people gathered around him, he stood up and addressed
them in the following terms:
All praise be to Allah, the One and Only who is sought by all, the Unique and the
One Who was not created out of anything nor created anything out of pre-existing
matter. On the contrary, He created everything through His Might which is manifest
in all things. And verily, everything came into existence because of Him. He has no
attribute which can be comprehended, nor has He any limit which can be
established. In linguistic embellishment, the tongue is crippled when it comes to
describing His Attributes. And circumlocution with respect to His Attributes leads to
a blind alley. The sharpest of intellects are unable to comprehend His Kingdom. All
comprehensive explanation is rendered ineffective in delving deep into His
Kingdom. Unseen veils impede even the lowest level of understanding of His Hidden
Knowledge. The keenest insights are at a loss when attempting to comprehend the
most superficial layer of His Subtleties.
Thus, hallowed be Allah who can neither be reached by the most intrepid intellect
nor conceived by the deepest insight. Exalted be He who is not subject to time,
length, or limit. Purified be He whose Beginning has not beginning, whose End has
no end, and who will never be annihilated. Glorified be He! He is as He has
described Himself, and the describers cannot reach His Descriptions. He delineated
the boundaries of all things at the time of their creation, and completely eradicated
the possibility of Him resembling things or of things resembling Him. He cannot be
contained by things which could describe Him. He has never been separate from
things that can describe Him. He has never bin distant from things which could raise
questions as to His whereabouts.
Rather, He, the Glorified, has encompassed all the things through His Knowledge,
strengthened them, and enumerated them in His Memory. Nothing is hidden from
33

Him behind the veils of the atmosphere, the deep slumber which occurs in darkness,
and whatever exists in the highest Heavens, and the lowest Earth. Everything that
exists has a custodian and a keeper. All things are surrounded by other things. And
He encompasses them all.
He is the One, the Unique, and the Besought. He is not subject to time. He does not
tire from creating thins. Whatever He willed, He said: "Be" and it was. He created
everything without precedent, without fatigue, and without planning. Anything which
makes something makes it out of something. Allah, however, made His Creation out
of nothing.
Every scholar acquired knowledge after being ignorant while Allah was never
ignorant, and never acquired knowledge. He encompassed all things through His
Knowledge even before they were created. Hence, His Knowledge did not increase
through their creation. After they came into existence, He knew as much about them
as He knew before they came into existence. He never created anything to
strengthen His Control. He never created anything out of fear of decay or loss. He
never created anything to oppose an adversary. He never created anything to match
an equal. He never created anything to become the equal of a dominating partner.
He never did anything of the like because all of creation is nurtured by Him, and all
things that exist are His Humble Slaves and Servants.
Glorified be He who never feels weary from creating, and sustaining. And glorified
be He who was not prevented from creating more out of inability or laziness. He
knew what He created, and created what He knew. Whatever He created was not the
result of deliberation or based on new knowledge. Nor does any doubt arise in Him
regarding the things He has not created. What He created, and what He did not
create, was the result of His Inviolable Decision. His Firm Knowledge, and His Exact
Command.
He made Himself Unique in His Lordship, and Specific in (His) Oneness. He
earmarked glory and praise for Himself, made Himself Peerless in Unity, Grandeur
and Sublimity. He remains Matchless in Praise, and Exalted in His Glory. He is far
above parenthood. And he is purified and sanctified against the feminine touch (i.e.
sexual relations). He is far too Great and too Mighty to seek the proximity of any
participant. Thus, nothing He has created can oppose Him. There is no equal to Him
in His Possessions, and there is no partner for Him in His Kingdom.
He is the One, the Unique, and the Besought of all. He is the Eternal, the Everlasting,
and the Lord of Space. He has always been, and always will be. He is Unique in
Eternity. He existed before time and will exist after the end of all affairs. He will never
come to an end nor be exhausted.
This is how I describe my Lord. Thus, there is no god but Allah. He is the Greatest of
the Great. Glorified and Exalted be He. He is the Mightiest of the Mighty. He is far,
far, above what the unjust claim about Him.
And Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Saqar al-Saigh also said this sermon that
Muhammad ibn al- Abbas ibn Bassam said: Abu Zayd Said ibn Muhammad al-Basri
related to me that Umrah bint Aws related to me that My grandfather al-Husayn ibn
Abd al-Rahman related to me on the authority of his father, on the authority of Abu
Ad Allah Ja''far ibn Muhammad (AS), on the authority of his father on the authority
of his grandfather (AS) that the Commander of the Faithful (AS) addressed this
sermon when he roused the people to the war with Muawiyah for the second time.
4. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with him) said:
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar; and Sad ibn Abd Allah all said on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa; and al-Haytham ibn Abu Masruq al-Nahdi; and
34

Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab all of whom on the authority of al-Hasan ibn
Mahbub; on the authority of Umar ibn Abu al-Miqdam; on the authority of Ishaq ibn Ghalib;
on the authority of Abu Abd Allah (AS); on the authority of his father (AS) that

Z _ G H G IG G Z _ G G7 Z G G H G7
G H G%G2 G G7 G

E G G d Y G%G3 G%GO G G G
_ 2 G 2 G GG G G%G3 G G (R)G G G G G G G G G
G Y G%G G G%G3 G G G H G%G G q _ G%G G _ G%G G

G G G%G G H E 4 _ G E 4 _ G G 2

G C G I G _ G7 G GG q G G" G G H G

G _ 2 _GH G IG G I I G I G" %

n
G G G GI G I_ 2G G G E _ H I E _

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said in some of his sermons:
All praise is due to the Allah Who is Unique in His Beginning, and is Greatest in
Divinity in His Eternity. He is the Great Absolute with Grandeur and Might. He
innovated what He instigated. And He originated what He created without example
prior to creating anything. The One without a Beginning raised us through the
benevolence of His Lordship. With His knowledge He rendered. Due to the judgment
of His Omnipotence He created all of creation. With the light of morning He made the
dawn. Therefore, there is no substitute for His Creation, and none can modify what
He makes. There is no hastening his Judgement, and no resting from His Call.
There is no decline to His Realm, not an interruption to His Time. He is the First
Existence, and is Forever Permanent. He is covered by His light, not by His
Creation, in the high-aspiring horizon, the lofty might, and the high realm. He is far
from everything, yet He is close to everything. Hence, He is Evident to His creation
without being seen. He is the Highest Prospect. He liked to be qualified with
Oneness so He covered Himself with His own Light. He is Distinctive in His
Sublimity, and is Hidden from His Creation.
He sent Messengers to His Creation as His Decisive Argument and Witnesses over
them. Between the Messengers, He sent Prophets to His Creation, to give glad
tidings (to the believers) who would be granted eternal life after having received the
Evidence from Allah. He also sent Prophets to His Creation as warners of impeding
35

doom to those who would be destroyed after having received the Evidence (from
Allah). He did all of this so that servants may know their Lord. As a result, they
recognized His Lordship after having denied it. They professed the Unity of His
Divinity as a result of Diving Guidance.
5. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with him) said:
Muhammad ibn Yahya al- Attar, and Ahmad ibn Idris both said: Muhammad ibn Ahmad
ibn Yahya said on the authority of some our scholars hurrying the transmission that

1/2
G G G % E G G G G!"

G H % G H % H Z G E G

I G 3 I E G G H H G
G G G H G G % G I
2 I 3

A man came to al-Hasan ibn Ali (AS) and said to him: "O son of the Messenger of
Allah! Describe your Lord to me so that I can understand Him better."
Therefore, al-Hasan ibn Ali (AS) bowed his head in silence for quite a while, before
lifting it up and saying:
All praise is for Allah, who has no beginning, nor end. He neither has a face through
which He may be perceived, nor a back that He may be restricted. He cannot be
limited with (the word) till what,' nor with an appearance so that He may have parts.
He cannot be described with variation so that He may have an extent. He can neither
be perceived by intellects and imaginations, nor by thoughts and concepts. Reason
and intellect cannot describe Him by means of the questions: when,' from what did
He begin,' on what' does He reveal or in what' does He conceal? We cannot say
why not' as He does not shun (His Creation). He created the creations; therefore, He
was Original and unprecedented. He originated what He unprecedented and
unprecedented what He originated. He did what He intended, and intended what He
extended. Such is Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.
6. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with him) said:
Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Saffar said on the authority of Ubbad ibn Sulayman, on the
authority of Sad ibn Sad that

. G% I G H GG H G _ G L d :
I asked Abu al-Hasan (Ali) al-Rida (AS) about Divine Unity. He respondet is what
you already follow."
36

7. My Father (may Allah have mercy on him) that Sad ibn Abd Allah said on the authority
of Ibrahim ibn Hashim; ad Yaqub ibn Yazid both of them on the authority of Ibn Fuddal, on
the authority of Ibn Bukayr, on the authority of Zurarah that

H G7 % H H m % G G G 2 G

Z o
G >

.H H G 3
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of the Mighty and
High: And to Him submits whoever is in heavens and the Earth, willingly or
unwillingly.1 He said: "They are bound to the belief in the Unity of Allah, the Mighty
and High."
8. My father (may Allah have mercy on him) that Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn
al-Husayn said on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sinan, on the authority of Ishaq ibn alHarith, on the authority of Abu Basir that

GG % G " G H GG
2 IG G (R) Z % G #

G H _ % Y G H GG O

G G H G E G G G E 4

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) took out a small box and took out from it a piece of
paper, which had the following written on it:
Praise be to the One! There is no god but He. He is the Eternal, and the Originator
without beginning. He is the Eternal, who does not tire. He is the Living, who does
not die. He is the Creator of the seen and the unseen. He is the Knower of
Everything without being taught. Such is Allah who has no associate.
9. Muhammad ibn al-Qasim the Commentator (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Yusuf
ibn Muhammad ibn Ziyad, and Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Sayyar said on the authority of their
fathers, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ali al-Rida (AS), on the
authority of his father (AS), on the authority of his grandfather AS) that

_ G!" : G _ G%G _ E G G G H G _ G G G G G I

G m % H G" _ G 2 G H G (R) H

H G Z G G G G7 Z G G I G G GZ O

m _ G E G G % Y G%G
G % G E G G % Y G%G

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 3:83.

H E G G G G G7 E E%G G G

m

G G L 2 >
G G m H 2 H
>

A man stood up in the presence of (Ali) al-Rida (AS) and said to him: "O son of the
Messenger of Allah! Describe your Lord for us as there are some people who differ
with us."
Hence, al-Rida (AS) said:
Verily, he who describes his Lord by analogy is still ambiguous in the world. He is
straying from the straight path. He is transient in the deviation (from that which is
right). He is lead astray from the way. And he says things that are not proper. I am
describing Him the way He described Himself, without relying on images. It is
possible to describe Him without recurring to anthropomorphism. He is Close in His
Farness, and is without an equivalent. He cannot be compared to His Creation.
He does not oppress anyone in His Judgment. The creation is critical of what they
know. And they pursue what He has embedded in His Book. He is Aware of
everything they do. They do not intend anyone but Him. He is Near, but He is not
attached. He is Far, but not cut off. He is Ascertained, ut is not exemplified. He is
United, and not divided into parts. He is Known by His Signs, and is proved by His
Symbols. Hence, there is no god but He, the Great, and the Most High.
10. He (AS) then said: He spoke another word after this: My father related to me on the
authority of father, on the authority of his grandfather, on the authority of his father (AS)
that

G G G%G G _ G%G G H 3 #$
E ^ H
.. G G2G

q Y G G % G%G G % IH 2

The messenger of Allah (SA) said: "Anyone who attributes Him with the
shortcomings of His Servants had done Him an injustice.
The Compiler of this book says: The tradition is long. We have taken from it the required
passage. I have transmitted al of it in the commentary of the Quran.
11. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (may Allah be pleased with him) said on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Yahya al- Attar on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Abd Allah ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Ali ibn Mihazyar that
Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) wrote a letter to a man in his own handwriting. I read the
supplication it contained, and it said:
38

E G7 % 3 G%_ G E G!" }
H E 4 G 2

H G7 G H E 4 C m 2 H E 4 H

. 2 m % G " HI 3 HI
O He Who existed before anything existed! O He Who created everything! O He Who
will remain after everything perishes! O He besides Whom there is no god! O He
Who is served in the highest of the heaves! O He Who is served in the lowest of the
Earths! And O He Who is served between them, and below them!
12. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (may Allah have mercy on him) said on the authority of
his paternal uncle Muhammad ibn Abul al-Qasin, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Barqi, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa al-Yaqtini, on the authority of
Sulayman ibn Rashid, on the authority of his father, on the authority of al-Mufaddal ibn
Umar that

. G G H m G G 2 L G
I heard Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) say "Praise be Allah who begets not so He may
be inherited, nor is He begotten so He may be associated."
13. Ali Ibn Ahmad Ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on him)
said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismaiil al-Barmaki
said: Ali ibn al- Abbas related to me that Ismail ibn Mihran al-Kufi related to me on the
authority of Ismail ibn Ishaq al-Juhani, on the authority of Faraj ibn Farwah, on the
authority of Masadah ibn Sadaqah, on the authority of Abu Abd Allah that

G G GG G q GG G m G G 2 L G

Z G G%G Z 2 % G ! 2 3 H

] }

G m G G H _ H G H
G G G G G G GGO G _ GGO G G G G G E C G " G G%G [ _ m

d m G % G G G G2G NH G qG H G I d G G
G G G G G 2 % L G G 2 G G % L H 3 q % G

G Y G G G7 G H G G G G 2 G G G G O Y G G GG O2 G C
G H % H G E G%G3 G

C q G G G G G O G G

39

G G H % m Z _ G G " % G qG % 3
>

_ G o

G G I H G "G G G m

G >

H I C C G G L HG" H H G " G 2
% 2 G
G O

H G G C H G%G G G G G

% 2
E 2 G G% E G % E G G G H G H G! H
G G G 4 G%G G Z G G G HG" I G G (R)G

>

G 3/4
G H G " I m GH >
>
% 3

G%G % G 3 G_ G G G G _ G >

G G%G G G G G G%G Z IG2
n
G _ >

G G G H G IG G GG I 2H

G O
G G G G H G 1/2

H G C % H G G G G G " G7 L H G >

G G G IG G O G%G G G G H G G 2

! E G G G%G3HG >
2

G G >

G >

G L G%G3G G7 Z H % G G G

GLI H 3 G%G3 G G G "

_ % 2 3 G G

3 G I Z G L G G IG" G G >
G G G G G % H dG Z G L I G 2 G" L % 2 Z _
G 2 G

G G G 2G G%G3HG G G G G 1/2
G >
H % 2H m HG" G G %
G2 G%G G G G % 2H m

40

% 3 4 G H #
G % 2 4 G H
G G H G%G3 GG O
G >
G 3 G%G G G G7 3

G7 > I G%G G GL
G _ HG > A

G (R) Z 2G % Z H E 4 C G%G G $ I G H G G O
E I G G %I H % G G GG 3 G G E 4 H G d H G H G
G%G3 G " G!" _ G G m G G!" G IG G
*
m G%G G 4 % G 2

G H L 7 G%G G % H G G % E G G E %H

G H G G d G _ G G 2 I G m Z G " % #

2 IG 3 H G%G3 G G

G I G G O G G7 >

I G O >
H I C G G G 3 IG O
G G 2 G G H % 2H

G O

G%G G G GG q G m % H G G G 2 G G IG

m G 2 G GGH _ G m % H d % H G % H dG G %2 G m

G G%G G G%G G H G _ G _ Y G" .E G2 E G x

G G7 G H % H G G%G3 _ G G G%G L G%G3 $ >

G Z *

C G G _ G E G 3 I E A
G7 G G GI H G G G%G3G 2 G G
G % IH 2 H G H G

G%G G Z IG 3 G G H

41

G m H ! % 2 G >
G Y I H G(R) G%G G GG G G%G L 3 G%G G

o
3 I G 3 G

G _ G H G (R) H H G G!" % G G I G H G O G H %

G A

H H _ G G G G%G H $
G qG G G GI G G

I G % 2 I G7 C I 3 H G G%G G G 3 G G I

G G % 2 G _ G *

While the Commander of the Faithful (AS) was preaching from his pulpit in (the
Mosque of) al-Kufah, a man stood up and said: "O Commander of the Faithful!
Describe for us your Lord, Blessed and Exalted be He, so that we can increase our
love and understanding of Him."
Hence, the Commander of the Faithful (AS) became angry, and called all to attend.
Thus, the people gathered until the mosque was packed. Then he stood up, with his
face flushed, and addressed the congregation as such:
All praise be to Allah for Whom refusal to give does not enrich, and for Whom
munificence does not make poor! All who give lose, expect He. He is full of
beneficial bounties and plentiful gifts. All of creation depends on His Generosity for
their sustenance. He has prepared the way for those who seek Him. He is as
Generous when He is asked, as He is when He is not asked. Time does not affect
Him as this would imply that He is subject to change.
His Essence would not be affected, and His Wealth would not be diminished, even if
He gave away all of the silver and all of the gold found in the mines in the
mountains, and all of the pearls which the shells of the ocean produce for His
Servants. His Wealth would remain great and unaffected, even if He answered the
demands of every beggar because He is the Most Generous. Giving does not
decrease His Wealth, not do the request of His Supplicants make Him miserly. His
Command, when He intends anything, is only to say to it: Be, so it is.1
The Angels are incapable of approaching the nobility of His Throne. They are
confused when they attempt to understand Him and the greatness of His Might and
Majesty. Although they are close to His Realm, they know nothing about His Affair
except what He informs them. They are so close to the sanctity of His Realm, that
they recognize the limitations with which they were created saying: Glory be to
Thee! We have no knowledge but that which Thou hast taught us; surely Thou art
the Knowing, the Wise.2
1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 36:82.
Translator's Note: Quran: 2:32

42

Then what is your opinion, O questioner, about the One I have described in such
terms? Praise and glory be to Him. He has no beginning, and is not subject to
change. His Essence does not change states. Long stretches of day and night have
no affect on Him. He originated the creation without any example which He could
follow, and without any specimen prepared by any deity that was before Him.
Attributes do no encompass Him so that we can comprehend Him, much less
comprehend Him by means of limitations. He is Still. There is nothing whatsoever
like unto Him. Exalted is He from the attributes of the created. Eyes cannot perceive
Him so that He may be described by sight. His Essence is only known to Himself
and cannot be recognized by His Creation. His Greatness surpasses the greatest
conjectures of the most imaginative. He is Higher than anything that could be
conceived by the feeble minds who seek to understand His Inner Greatness.
He does not have a likeness. Nothing He creates is similar to Him. To the ones that
recognize Him, He is above compeers and opponents. The ones who give partners
to Allah are liars as they compare Him to their own kind. They embellish Him
through their imaginations with the ornaments of creation. They divided Him in parts
through speculation. They use their intellects to assess Him on the basis of
creation, giving Him different strengths. How can this be done when it is impossible
for the intellect to measure His Extent?
Misleading dreams have gone astray in perceiving His Essence; because He is
higher than the limits of human reasoning. Even the Angels, who are close to His
Realm of Glory, cannot encompass Him. Exalted is He from having a parallel with
which He may be resembled.
He is the Subtle [al-Latif]. He prevents the imagination from finding Him in the depth
of His Realm. He prevents the minds which are free from evil thoughts from
comprehending His Being. He prevents the hearts who long to embrace His
Attributes from going beyond description, and securing knowledge of His Divinity.
He turns back those who cross the dark pitfalls of the unknown in their search for
Him. Glorified be He!
All those who seek to comprehend him return defeated, admitting that His
Knowledge cannot be understood through such random efforts. They admit that not
an iota of His Honor can enter the intellect of the greatest thinkers. They admit that
He is far from the most powerful strengths of limited beings because He is other
than His Creation. Therefore, He has no peer in His Creation. Verily, things are
compared to their equal. However, if something has no equal, how can it be
compared with something which is completely different from it?
He is the Originator who had nothing before Him, and He is the Last who has
nothing after Him. Eyes cannot perceive Him due to the magnificence of His Power.
Eyes are concealed with veils, and cannot penetrate their density. Eyes cannot
penetrate the Veils of the Possessor of the Throne, and they cannot reach the One
who Governs Everything through His Will. The pride of all tyrants cringes except the
Majesty of His Greatness. All slaves surrender to Him, and all faces fear His Wrath.
The signs of His Wisdom are apparent from everything He has created. Everything
He created is His Proof, and is linked to Him. It is a silent creation, it is His Proof that
speaks through planning. He has fixed limits for everything He has created and has
set everything firm. He has put everything in its place through the gracefulness of
His Planning.
He has fixed the direction for everything. Nothing surpasses or falls shorts of the
position He has willed. Nothing disobeys His Command to move, when He intends it
to move. He does so without effort, and without challenge to His Order. Thus was
completed the creation, and it bowed in obedience to Him. It was time for His
43

creation to respond to Him. The laziness of any slug or the inertness of any excusefinder did not prevent them from doing so.
So He straightened the curves of things, and completed the traces of their limits.
With His Power He created coherence n their contradictory parts, and joined
together the factors of similarity. Then He distinguished their colors, and separated
them in varieties which differ in quantities, properties, and shapes. All of this was a
new creation. He made them firm, shaped them as He intended, and invented them.
Through His Knowledge He organized everything into species. His Planning
perceives the splendor of its destiny.
O questioner! Know that he who describes our Sublime Lord by means of limbs and
extremities knows nothing about His Nature. Verily, his heart did not profess with
certainty that He is devoid of partners. It is as though he has not heard people
renouncing their false gods by saying: By Allah! We were certainly in manifest error,
when we made you equal to the Lord of the worlds.1
Whoever equates our Lord with anything has given Him a partner. Whoever gives
Him a partner is an unbeliever as is stated in His Unambiguous verses, and as is
indicated by His Clear Arguments. This is because Allah cannot be conceived by the
limits of human intelligence. If He could be, He would be subject to change. Nor can
Allah be conceived by means of intellectual efforts. If He could be, he would be
limited, and an object subject t alteration.
He is the Producer [al-Munshi'] who created everything without a need for
imagination, without the urge of a hidden impulse, without any past experiment, and
without the assistance of any partner who may have helped Him in creating
wonderful things.
Those who compare Him to His Creation divided Him into parts: some are limited,
some vary in size, and others fall into different categories. He, the Mighty and High,
Exists on His Own Accord, and is not dependent. People have not honored Him with
the honor that He deserves.
In order to demonstrate that He cannot be compared to His Creation, that He has no
equals, and that He is far above the analogies of the unbelievers who give him
limitations, He said: Any they have not honored Allah with the honor that is due to
Him; and the whole Earth shall be in His grip on the Day of Resurrection and
heavens rolled up in His right hand; glory be to Him, and may He be exalted above
what they associate (with Him).2
When describing Allah, limit your selves to the Divine Attributes which the Quran
has provided, and seek light from the effulgence of its guidance. Leave to Allah that
knowledge which Satan has prompted you to seek, and which neither the Quran
enjoins you to seek, nor is there any trace of it in the actions or sayings of the
Prophet and other Imams of Guidance. This is the extreme limit of Allah's claim
upon you.
Know that those who are firm in knowledge refrain from opening through the veils of
the unseen. The firm in knowledge, acknowledge their ignorance, and refuse to seek
justification for their belief by means of the unseen. Hence, they say: We believe in
it, it is all from our Lord.3 Allah, the Mighty and High praises them for admitting that
they cannot obtain forbidden knowledge. They do not engage in deep discussions
regarding the knowledge which is hidden from them and remain firm in their faith.
Be content with this, and do not limit the Greatness of Allah on the basis of the
limits of your own intelligence; otherwise, you will be destroyed.
1

Translator's Note: Quran: 26:97-8.
Translator's Note: Quran: 39:67.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 3:7.
2

44

14. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: Ali
ibn al- Abbas related to me that Jafar ibn Muhammad al-Ashari related to me, on the
authority of Fath ibn Yazid al-Jurjani that

G%_ G H G!" q G G H G 4 % d _ G G G!" L 2 :
G 1/2
G G 2G G G I *GG H
G H G G G G G _ G % 3

G G G%G G G G _

G _ G G G G%G3 G%G3 $ G G I
G%G G G G % G G % 3 >

G % 2
G % m G%GO 2 G G%G G

G H_ G G G H G G % 3 % G G H G G IG 3 G G G G IG 3 G7 G

G G G G 2 E dG G G

G G G E G Gd G E G

> 3/4
G E G G G H E G G GG 2 E G G GG O2 E H G

x G G H G 3 G G % G G

G I H E G _G I G % >
Z G G IG 3 I G _ % H

I G G G G G G IG Y

.

I wrote to Abu Al-Hasan (Ali) al-Rida (AS) asking him about Divine Unity. Therefore, he
replied to me in his own writing.
Jafar says: Verily, Fath took out the letter for me so I read it myself in Abu al-Hasan's
(AS) writing:
In the name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful. All praise be to Allah,
who gave human beings a natural predisposition to recognize their Lord and to praise
Him. Allah guides humankind towards Himself through His Creation, and who proves
that He is Eternal by bringing creatures into existence. He has made them resemble
45

each other to prove that there is nothing that resembles Him. He has made His Signs as
witnesses to His Might.
His Essence is independent from His Attributes. Eyes are prevented from seeing Him.
Imagination is incapable of encompassing Him. There is no duration for His Being, nor
is there any limit for His Continuation. Human senses do not encompass Him.
No screen (of non-understandability) can conceive Him. The only screen between the
Creator and the created is creation itself. The reason why the created have been
screened from the Creator is to prevent the created from conceiving of their Creator in
terms which are unworthy. This is because the adjectives which apply to the created
are not suitable for the Creator.
The other reason (that Allah cannot be understood) is that there is a world of difference
between the Creator and the created, the Sustainer and the sustained (the Ruler and the
ruled), and the Confiner and the confined. He is One, but not in a numerical sense. He is
the Creator, but not in the sense of movement or action. He is the All-Hearing, but not
through any auditory organ. And He is the All-Seeing, but not by visual means.
He is a Witness, but without mutual contact. He is Manifest, but not in the sense of
being distant. He is Hidden, but not in the sense of being behind a curtain. He is
Apparent, but not in the sense of being in front of anything. Penetrating eyes have
called miserable trying to perceive the truth about Him. His Existence dwarfs and
cripples the imagination (in its attempt to grasp Him).
The first step in accepting faith is acknowledging the existence of Allah. And the most
perfect way of acknowledging Him lies in recognizing His Unity. And the peak of His
Unity lies in negating that His Attributes are part of His Essence, since attributes are
separate from the entity they describe in the same way that the entity is independent of
and separate from the attributes which describe it. If united, the entity and its attributes
produce plurality (as opposed to unity).
Plurality nullifies eternity. Hence, whoever ascribes attributes to Allah has actually
measure Him. And whoever measures Him has actually nullified His Eternity. Whoever
asks how He is, seeks to describe and explain Him. Whoever asks what He is, actually
induces Him. Whoever asks where He is, actually vacates Him (from other places).
Whoever asks how long He will exist, actually confines Him (to a limited time). He was
the Knower before there was anything to know. He was the Creator when there was no
creation. He was the Lord when there was nothing over which to rule. He was the One
God when there was nothing to serve. Such is a description of our Lord. And He is far
above what the narrators have said about Him.
15. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (May Allah have mercy on him) said:
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmake said: Ali
ibn al- Abbas said: al-Hasan ibn Mahbub said on the authority of Hammad ibn Amr alNasibi that:

% G % H G G G ! G G G H G E H }
L d : _ G G H E

OG 2

% G 3

G%G3 G G q m I O G ! G O G%G3 G G

46

I asked Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) regarding Diving Unity; hence, he said:
He is the One, the Needless, the Eternal, and the Independent. He has no protection
to which He may adhere, But he is the Protector of All things. He is the Knower of
the unknown. He is known (even) to the ignorant. He is related to uniqueness. His
Creation is not in Him, nor is He in His Creation. He is not sensed nor felt, and eyes
cannot perceive Him. He is Elevated, yet He is Near. He is close, yet He is far. He is
disobeyed, yet He forgives. He is obeyed, so He rewards.
The Earth does not encompass Him. His Heavens do not carry Him. Verily, He
carries all things by means of His Omnipotence. He is related to perpetuity and
eternity. He does not forget nor waste time. He does not make mistakes or play.
There is no separation for His Intent. His Judgment is His Reward, and His
Command is accomplished. He does not beget to be inherited, not is He begotten to
have an associate. And there is none like unto Him.
16. With the same chain of narration on the authority of Ali ibn al- Abbas that Yazid ibn Abd
Allah said on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said al-Khazzaz, on the authority of the ones
he relates from, that

C G H 3 G H H : G G2 G

G!" 3
o
I G E 4 G% E 4 C G%GO G

b

. G G H % 3

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Allah is the Goal of those who seek to reach him, and the seeker differs from the
Goal. He is United in His Lordship. He described Himself as Limitless. Hence, the
one remembering Allah is other than Allah. And Allah is other than His Names. Every
identifier differs from the identified, and is thus a creation.
Do you not see what His Word says: the might belongs to Allah, the reverence
belongs to Allah, and He said: And Allah's are the best names; therefore, call on Him
thereby.1 And He said: Say: Call upon Allah or call upon, the Most Compassionate
Allah; whichever you call upon, He has the best names.2 Therefore, the names of
Allah are subjoined to Him, and this is the purest expression of Divine Unity.
17. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi Abu al-Husayn said: Musa ibn Imran related to me
on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Yazid, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn al-Hakam ibn
Zuhayr, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Jarir al- Abdi that

1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 7:180.
Translator's Note: Quran: 17:110.

G% m G _ G C C C G H m

I G % C % H C % H E 4 C % G

2
G H x

G O
G I H L I G 2 H H _ % _
.

All praise is for Allah who is neither sense, nor felt, nor touched, and who cannot be
perceived with the five senses. He cannot be imagined. He cannot be described by
tongues. Everything that can be sensed is created. And Allah is the Most High.
Wherever He is searched He is found.
All praise is for Allah who was before the ward was' (was created). The word was'
was not there to describe Him. In fact, He was the First Being. No creator has made
Him. Exalted be His Praise! Rather, He created things before they existed; therefore,
they were as He made them. He knows what has existed, and what will exist. He was
there when nothing was there, and when nothing could be heard. Thus, He existed
when there was no existence.
18. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: alHusayn ibn al-Hasan ibn Burdah said: al- Abbas ibn Amr al-Fuqami said on the authority
of Abu al-Qasim Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al- Alawi, on the authority of al-Fath ibn Yazid alJurjani that

G m % G G G G!" G O

G% H m G G G G G G 2 G O

H 3 >
G % H H G%G G G G
% 3 % G 3

b E G C G H G G H G G2 G" % m H
% m

H E E G G H % H G(R) HH G H G " E G G

48

G C _ G _ G G Z % G . H
G m I_ 2 m
% H G G d G G G G G H G G G

Y G G L 4 % I G 2 m

G G G7 H d G~ G7 % G H H G" H L H G GLI G

G H % H % H G(R) G G G "
Y G H G H G I G
H E G G % G H G E G G % Y Y G G G

%2 G%G % G%G % Z
G G % H G7 G G G G7 G Y G G G G GO G

G % H ~G(R) G! 3/4
G H L G 4 G G G % H H G E G

G H L H G" G! qGC ~ G G G G G

G 2 H G G !" 3

_ G G G G H GG G U G o

IG I G G G G7 G G 2 G G7 G % G m G >

G d3 H I G" G I Y I G%G I I G E

G H G E 4 G E 4 G G H H

2 3
H G " G G G G G G L G L E 4 G

OG I G GG G G2G G7 H GG 2
m !

% Z Z G I C G G
49

H G%G3H 2 Z G Z G _ G OG H G " L

G H 2 G G Z Z G H G G
E G " G H G G 3 G " H G " q I H G " G G

H G Ud % $ % H L m d m E G "

G G " G%G G G G G" G H G I H G L 2 ^ Ud d m G
H G H G G G" H G L 2 % d m %

m % H G" G G G G G G G 2 G

H G G GG G G G G G E G G m G *

G 2 G

G G 2 H L 3 G H G H G7 G H H G k

G E % m >
U
G% % G 2 m H G G G GG G

G d L G G L G L GG

>

m

G GH G GY E I % 3 H G " I G $ GIG

G3/4

% % I L 2H % ~ d % G 2_ G L
._ G G L H 3 G G%G G G }

I met him1 (AS) on my return from Mecca to Khurasan and he was going to Iraq. I
heard him say that "Whoever fears Allah is feared, and whoever obeys Allah is
obeyed." So I politely went over to him and greeted him. Hence, he (AS) returned my
greetings and then added:
O Fath, he who pleases the Creator does not consider the displeasure of the
creation. And he who displeases the Creator deserves that that displeasure of
creation overpowers him. Verily, the Creator can only be described by means of the
attributes He has given Himself.
And how could He be described when he made the senses incapable of conceiving
Him, the concepts incapable of describing Him, and the eyes incapable of perceiving
Him? He is far above the attributes of the attributers and the descriptions of the
1

Translator's Note: This is the Eight Imam (AS) as is apparent from the fourteenth tradition.

50

describers. He is distant in His Closeness and close in His Distance. Thus, He is
near in His Farness and Far in His Nearness.
Since He created conditions, the question how' cannot apply to Him. He ionized
space; therefore, the question where' cannot apply to Him. IN doing so He is the
Inventor [Mubdi'] of conditions and space. O Fath! Everybody is nourished with
food except the Creator, the Sustainer. Verily, He created bodies, yet He has neither
body nor image. He does not have parts, not does He have an end. He does not
increase or decrease.
He is not composed of any substance that would be found in a body. He is the
Subtle, the All-Knowing, the All-Listening, and the All-Hearing. He is the One, the
Unique, and the Needless. He begets not, nor is He begotten, and there is nothing
equal unto Him. He is the Producer of All things. He gave shape to all bodies and
made all images. IF it were as the anthropomorphist say, then the Creator could not
be distinguished from the created, the Sustainer from the sustained, or the
Originator from the originated. However, He is the Producer. He differs from created
bodies, images and things in that He resembles nothing.
I asked: "if Allah is One and humankind is one, do they not resemble each other in
oneness?"
Hence, he (AS) replied:
You have said something impossible. May Allah secure you! Verily, the resemblance
is limited to meaning. Names are one, and they indicate what is named. When it is
said that the human being is one, it means that he is one as opposed to two. But, in
fact, the human being is not truly one because his body parts are different and his
colors are different. He is composed of many parts which are not the same. His
blood is other than his flesh. His flesh is other than his blood. His nerves are other
than his veins. His hair is other than his skin. His darkness is other than his
paleness. Likewise is the rest of creation. Thus, the human being in only "one" in
name but not "one" in meaning.
Allah, Exalted be His Majesty, is One and there is none other than Him. There is no
variation, contrast, increase, or decrease in Him. As for the human being, he is
created from different parts and different substances. He is only "one" in
combination.
I enquired: As for your statement regarding "the Subtle," kindly explain it to me, I
know, of course, that His Subtlety differs from that of others. However, I would
appreciate it if you could explain it to me in greater detail.
Therefore, he (AS) answered:
O Fath! I said: He is Subtle in subtleness of His Creation and in His Knowledge of
microscopic matter. Do you not see His Stamp on the various types of plants, both
soft and rough? And do you not contemplate the subtle creation of creatures like the
gnat and the mosquito and those insects which are even smaller than these two and
are almost invisible to the naked eye? In fact, they are almost invisible due to their
tiny size, making it virtually impossible to differentiate the male from the female, and
the young from the old.
Thus, when we see the smallness of creatures in their refinement, their instinct to
reproduce, and their fear of death; when we see the creatures that exist in the
depths of the oceans, and in the branches of trees; when we see what exists in
deserts and wastelands, and that each species has a means of communication
through which they are understood by their offspring; when we see how creatures
feed their offspring, and how creatures are distinguished by color, red with yellow,
and white with red; then, and only then do we come to appreciate the subtlety of the
Creator. Verily, everything has a precursor. Allah, the Creator, the Subtle, and the
Sublime created everything out of nothing.
51

I asked: "May I be your ransom! Is there a creator other than the Sublime Creator?"
He (AS) replied:
Verily, Allah, the Blessed and High says: Blessed be Allah, the best of creators.1 He
has certainly acknowledged that there are creators among His Servants, including
Jesus, the son of Mary [Isa ibn Maryam] (AS). He created from clay a figure of a bird
by the will of Allah. Then he breathed into it, and it became a bird, by the will of
Allah. And Samiri made for them the body of a calf that mooed.
I enquired: "Undoubtedly Isa created from clay a bird as a proof of his
Prophethood, while Samiri made the body of calf to refute Musa's (AS) Prophethood.
Was that Allah's will? Certainly this is astonishing."
He answered:
Woe unto you, O Fath! Verily, Allah has two intents or two wills; the definite [hatm]
intent, and the determined [azm] intent. He forbids with desire, and orders without
desire. Have you not seen that He banned Adam (AS) and his wife from eating from
the tree while He wanted them to. Had he not willed it, they would not have eaten it,
and if they had not eaten it, they would have defied Allah's will. He ordered Ibrahim
(AS) to slaughter his son Ismail (AS) and desired him not to slaughter him. If He did
not will for him to slaughter him, then Ibrahim (AS) would have defied Allah's will,
the Mighty and High.
I said: "You have relieved me. May Allah relieve you! Except that you asked: The
All-Hearing and the All-Seeing, does He hear with an ear and see with an eye?"
Consequently, He (AS) replied:
Most certainly He hears what He sees and sees what He hears. He sees, but not with
an eye like the eyes of the created. He hears, but not like the listeners listen. He
hears in the sense that nothing is hidden from Him, not even the movement of a
black particle on a hard rock in the dark of the night, in the depth of the Earth or in
the depth of the oceans. We say: He is Seeing but not like the created. And when He
comprehends all languages, and does not confuse one from another. We say: He
hear, but not like others hear.
I commented: "May I be your ransom! I still have one last question."
He (AS) said: "Proceed for the sake of Allah, for the good deeds of your father!"
I asked: "Would He know the things that He has not made; that if He did make them,
how would they be?"
He answered:
Woe to you! Your questions are defiantly difficult. Have you not heard Allah say? If
there had been in them any gods except Allah, they would both have certainly been
in a state of disorder.2 And His Word: And some of them would certainly have
overpowered others.3 And He said relating an account of the people of Hell: Take us
out; we will do good deeds other than those which we used to do.4 And He said: And
if they were sent back, they would certainly go back to that which they are
forbidden.5 He certainly knew what would have happened if other things had
happened.
I then got up to kiss his hand and feet, but he (AS) brought his head nearer: hence I
kissed his face and head. I left with so much contentment and joy that I am
incapable of describing what was clarified for me of virtue and fortune.
The Compiler (may Allah be pleased with him) of this book says: Verily, Allah, the
Blessed, the High, forbade Adam and his wife from eating from the tree while
1

Translator's Note: Quran: 23:14.
Translator's Note: Quran: 21:32.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 23:91.
4
Translator's Note: Quran: 35:37.
5
Translator's Note: Quran: 6:28.
2

52

knowing that they would both eat from it. However He, the Mighty and High, decided
that He would not prevent them fro eating from the tree through determination [jabr]
and power [qudrah], in the same fashion that He had prohibited them from eating by
order and rebuke [zajr]. Thus, this is the meaning of His Will in these two case. If He,
the Mighty and High, prohibited fthem from eating by determination, and thenthey
ate from it, they would have defied His will, as al- `Alim1 (the Learned (AS) has said.
"Exalted is Allah, the Most High, from inability.
19. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Jafar al-Baghdadi related to me on the authority of Sahl
ibn Ziyad that

L 3 G GH 1/2

*

I G H G G7 L d _ G!" G 2 G G G Gd q

G G _G G _ G7 L G ~ C G ~ C G !H >
I H >
I E 2G E G (R)G

G G E I G E _ G G L
.k
G >

Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad al-Taqi (AS) said:
O Allah! The imaginations of the imaginative are astonished; the curiosity of the
curious has failed; the descriptions of the describers are ruined; and the words of
the vain doers have faded in their attempts to perceive You. The eyes cannot reach
You with indication or perception. They are far from the mark, so far from the mark!
O First One, O Unique, O Incomparable! You are Exalted above everything in Might
and Pride! And You are Lofty behind every depth and end with Power and Pride.
20. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi related to me on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki, on the
authority of al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan that Abu Sumaynah related to me on the authority of
Ismail ibn Aban, on the authority of Zayd ibn Jubayr, on the authority of Jabir al-Jufi who said

H G G G : _ G x E G
G E d d L G E} G G!"G

E L d G! 3/4

_ m Z

I % d H G (R) G%G G H H H d G

4
o

1

Translator's Note: This is one of the titles of Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS).

53

G O
H % 2
H E 4
G Z G Y % Z G" E 4 G
E 4 G
H % 4

A man from the learned natives of Sham (Greater Syria) came to Abu Jafar al-Baqir
(AS) and saihave come to you concerning an issue that nobody could explain
to me. I have asked three different persons, and each of them gave me a different
answer."
Abu Jafar (AS) said: "What is it?"
Hence he explained: "What is the first thing that Allah, the Mighty and High, created
from His Creation? Some of those whom I asked said: Omnipotence.' Some said:
Knowledge.' And others said: the Spirit."
Therefore, Abu Jafar (AS) replied:
They have said nothing! Let it be known that Allah, may His Remembrance be
Exalted, was there when nothing but Him was there. He was Honorable when there
was no honor, because He was there before His Honor and this is His Word: Glory
be to your Lord, the Lord of Honor, above what they describe.1 He was the Creator
when there was no creation. Thus, the first thing He created in creation was water,
the element from which all things are form.
So the questioner enquired: "Did He crate the (first) thing from something or from
nothing?"
Consequently, He (AS) answered:
He created the thing from nothing which existed before it. And if He had created the
thing from something, then nothing would be discontinuous. Thus, other that Allah
would have existed along with Him. In fact, Allah was there, and there was nothing
with Him. Hence, He created the thing from which all things originate, and that is
water.
21. My father (may Allah have mercy on him) that Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn AlHusayn ibn Abu al-Khattab said on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail ibn Bazi, on the
authority of Ibrahim ibn Abd al-Hamid that

G % 4 % 4 G G G7 m G L G :
I heard Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim (AS) saying the following prayer while he was in
prostration: "O He who is so High that nothing is above Him! O He who is so near that
nothing is without Him! Forgive me and my Companions!"
22. My father (may Allah have mercy on him) that Ahmad ibn Idris said on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Bishr, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Jamhur al- Ammi, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl ibn Yasar, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Sinan that

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 37:180.

54

H _ G H G IG G H G G7 : G G2 G

. H G "G G!"G G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said the following regarding the Great Lord and God:
"None but Allah can create something out of nothing. None but Allah can transfer one
substance into another. None but Allah can transfer existence into non-existence."
23. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Ali ibn
Ibrahim ibn Hashim said: My father said on the authority of al-Rayyan ibn al-Salt, on the
authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Riza (AS) on the authority of his father, on the authority of his
forefather, on the authority of Commander of the Faithfuly (AS) that

GO^ G%G G 3/4
H G $ % H G GG G G
.
G G GG G G GIH 2 G

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
Allah, Exalted be His Sublimity, said: He who interprets My Words on the basis of
his own personal opinion does not believe in Me. He who compares Me to My
Creation does not believe in Me. And he who uses analogy [qiyas] in religion is not
of My Religion.
24. Abu Abd Allah al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ushnani al-Razi the jurist in Balkh said tha
Ali ibn Mihrawayh al-Quzwini said on the authority of Dawud ibn Sulayman al-Farra', on the
authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) on the authority of his father, on the authority of his
forefathers (AS), on the authority of Ali (AS) that

G Y G H G E G G%GO$ G%G _

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "Divine unity is half of faith And increase your
sustenance by means of charity."
25. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Ali ibn alHusayn al-Sadabadi said: Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi said on the authority of
dawud ibn al-Qasim that

55

% 2H m _

G I G G % G I G%G G

G G >
G H G G m HG" G G 3 H G I % q Y

I heard Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) that "He who compares Allah with His creation is
an infidel and he who limits Him spatially is an unbeliever. And he who attributes to
Him what is forbidden is a liar." Then he (AS) recited this verse: Only they forge the
lie who do not believe in Allah's communications, and these are the liars.1
26. Abu al- Abbas Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taliqani (may Allah be pleased with
him) said: Abu Said al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Adwi said: Al-Haytham ibn Abd Allah al-Rummani
said: Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) on the authority of his father Musa ibn Jafar (AS) on the
authority of his father Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) on the authority of his father Muhammad
ibn Ali (AS) on the authority of his father Ali ibn al-Husayn on the authority of his father alHusayn ibn Ali (AS) that

H GG G q : E G G G G%G G G _ G G%G

H G G%G3 G G G%G I

G7 G G G G 2 E H G G 4 G%G G qG m E H G G

G G G G G G G G G >
G *
G G G G G G G >

G 2 G G G G 3 G G >

G *
H >

G >

G >
G % G%G G G % 3 G%G G G G%G 3 G G
G G L G % _ 3 G G % G G I G %I G 3 G G G G%GO G G G
G G G L 2 Y G G G%G G G G 2 G

E G G E G G O E dG G O E G G G G O G%G3 G G!" _

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 16:105.

56

G >
_ G% G 2 % G E 2 G

G *

G%G3 G G G G I >

G G o
G _ G G G G G G G G G%G3 G G A

G 2 G % L G G 3 _ G7
G _ L G % L G%G G

G G H _ G G I G

G I G%GO I G G G%G G

G I G G%G G " G
Z I G 2 H qG G Z $ I G C G G (R)G x I G%G3 G G I G%GO G "

4

A
Z G I G H G G (R)G Z G I G

G G Z G " H G " % G " I Z G2 Z G >

!

C % 2 Z H H I n

E _ E G G G Z G GLG G Z G G G G o
G >
G k

G 2 G G G 2_ H I G q G I G GH G

G E o

G G G G2 GC G G G

L G%G L L > H >

G G%G q G O % % k

G G H G H % H H %C G C % % 3 G C % H %
I H G C % L H G % L H % (c)
G H G " % G " G G7 I %3
H G H G G G%_ G G H H % G G G % H G G H G

.
G G H G G%GO G H G% H G G

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) addressed the people in the Mosque of al-Kufah in
the following terms:

All praise be to Allah, Who is neither from anything nor creates from anything. The
creation of all things from nothing is a manifestation of His Omnipotence. The fleeting
nature of all things ins a manifestation of His Permanence.
Although no space is devoid of Him, He cannot be subjected to the question "where?"
Nothing is similar to Him so He cannot be described through similarity [kayfiyya].
Neither is anything absent from His Knowledge so that He may know it through
distinction. He is Dissimilar to the attributes which He has brought about. He cannot be
comprehended by what He has created. He is beyond behavioral states due to His
Magnificence and Exalted Nature. Limits are forbidden to Him in the brilliant acute
mind's proficiencies. Enquiring minds cannot comprehend His Nature. Intellectual
explorers cannot conceive His Shape.
Due to His Greatness, He cannot be confined to space. Due to His Majesty, He is
beyond measure. Due to His Magnificence, He cannot be divided. Imaginations cannot
grasp Him entirely. He cannot be comprehended by minds nor can He be compared.
The most eager of intellects cannot hope to comprehend Him through inference.
Oceans of Knowledge have dried up attempting to fathom Him. The sharpest minds of
the opponents have shriveled attempting to describe His Omnipotence.
He is One but not numbers; Everlasting, but not with an extent; and Existing, but
without support. He is neither a genus so that the species may be compared to Him, nor
a shape so that the shapes may be compared to Him; nor like other things so that
descriptions may apply to Him. Intellects have floated away in the waves of His
Perception. Imaginations are astonished when contemplating His Eternity. Intellects are
prevented from understanding His Omnipotence. The minds have drowned in the
depths of the orbit of His Realm which possesses power over the bestowal of
blessings, and which forbids with magnificence.
He is Sovereign over all thins. He never declines nor is encompassed by an attribute.
The obstinate fixed stars surrender to Him through their orbit. The firm causes submit
to Him in the utmost heights of their section as a witness from all species over His
Lordship. The inability of beings bears witness to His Omnipotence. The coming into
being of beings bear witness that He is without a beginning. And the death of beings
bears witness that He is Everlasting.
Thus, there is no refuge for them from His Reach; there is no fleeing His Encirclement;
there is no hiding from His Decree; and there is no avoiding His Omnipotence. The
composition of nature is proof. Creation out of nothing is proof that He has no
beginning. The creative power is sufficient as an admonition. Thus, there is no limit
connected to Him, no likeness of Him, and there is nothing hidden from Him. Exalted is
He, the Most High, from the attributes of created things!
I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, with faith in His Lordship, and in contrast
to those who deny Him. And I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and His
Messenger, the Inhabitant of the Best Resting Place, the Fruit of the Most Noble Lions
and Purified Wombs, the Product of the Most Dignified Lineage and Best Birth place
which is inaccessible to others and which has the most honorable foundation.
He was chosen by Allah as His trustworthy Friend from the Tree of Prophethood. The
tree possesses fine wood, an upright trunk, high branches, blooming twigs, ripened
fruits, and a precious interior. In nobility was the tree planted, and in sanctity it grew,
branching off, and producing honorable fruits. Hence, the tree was given prestige, and
was made lofty by the Prophet Muhammad (SA).
Eventually, Allah, the Mighty and High, honored him with the Trusted Spirit [al-Ruh alAmin], the Open Light [al-Nur al-Mubin], and the Evident Book [al-Kitab al-Mustabin]. He
made Alboarak [buraq] subservient to Muhammad (SA) and the Angels greeted him.
The devils were frightened of him. Through him, Allah destroyed the idols, and the gods
that were served other than Him.
58

His practice [Sunnah] is sensible, his conduct [sirah] is just, and his judgment is true.
He complied with what his Lord ordered him, and fulfilled his responsibilities. He
clearly preached Divine Unity, and made known to creation that there is no god but
Allah, the One, the Only, who has not associates. Eventually, he purified the concept of
Diving Unity, attributing all Lordship to Him.
Through Divine Unity, He made apparent his proof, and with Islam elevated his status.
Allah, the Mighty and High, chose for His Prophet (SA) the spirit, the status, and the
expedition. May Allah bless him, and his Purified Progeny, as He has blessed all of the
Prophets who preceded him!
27. Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Isam al-Kulayni (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
Muhammad ibn Yaqub al-Kulayni said: Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Maan said: Muhammad ibn
ali ibn Atikah on the authority of al-Husayn ibn al-Nadr al-Fihri, on the authority of Amr alAwzaI, on the authority of Amr ibn Shimr, the authority of Jabir ibn Yazid al-Jufi, on the
authority of Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (AS), on the authority of his father (AS)
that

G I 2 E 2 G : G _ G%G
>
G G 2 E G G G H E} G

H G " 3 G H G $

G G E H G 2 G _ G H

H G IG G G7 %3 H 3 q
G%G3 G7 > G H G

I G G I G H 3 G G
G OG G H 2
G " G G H G G Gd3
G G " G G%G % I G H G " G E dG
Z G2 Z Z IG" 3H G 2 G ! % 2 G G x G Gd3 G

G H G " % G " I G%G Y % 2 q G%G G G H G G
H G G G 3 G 3 I % 2 Z H H I

H G G *_ GH G H GH G G

3 G
G 3 I

H G " _ G G H G G d H
C m % G O

H I C Z G _ G% C $

q G G G HG G G G Y G H G G G G

G G G G G G qG G q Y G G

59

E G _G G G G7 G 3/4
H I G G!" G m % H G(R)
G G G G G G m H
G >

G G m I G%G ^ G7 %

Ga G G G H G " 3o
I >

3 >
H E G H E G (c) GG H G 2 qG H G H

His grandfather, Imam Ali, the Commander of the Faithful, delivered the following
sermon seven days after the death of the Prophet (SA), after he had completed the
compilation of the Quran:
All praise be to Allah, who, although He is the Existent, cannot be conceived by the
imagination. Intellects are prevented from imagining His Essence through likeness and
form. His Essence does not alter. He is indivisible in His Perfection. He is the
Distinguisher, but not through differences of place. He is the Establisher, but not
through composition. He is the Knower, but not through instruments. His Knowledge
does not depend on instruments.. There is no knowledge besides Him.
If it is said: He was there' then it is based on the eternity of His Existence. And if it is
said: He is still there' then it is due to negating His non-existence. Thus, praise be Him
and Exalted is He from the words of he who serve s other than Him and take a god
other than Him, the Elevated, High. We extol Him with the praise that He approved for
His creation, and made mandatory upon Himself to accept it.
I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, Alone, without associates, and I bear
witness that Muhammad is His servant and His Messenger. The two witnesses elevate
the statement, and multiply the deeds. The scale of actions becomes lighter when these
two witnesses are removed form it, and it becomes heavier when these two are places
in it. With these two is the achievement of Paradise, escape from Hell, and crossing of
the Bridge (al-Sirat). With the two witnesses people may enter Paradise, and with
sending blessings [salawat] people attain mercy. Therefore, increase the blessings you
send to your Prophet (SA) and his Progeny (AS): Verily, Allah and His Angels bless the
Prophet; O you who believe, send blessings unto him and salute him with a salutation
worthy of respect.1
O people! There is no honor greater than Islam, no nobility more respectful than piety,
no refuge safer than godliness, no intercessor better than the repentance, no treasure
more beneficial than knowledge, no respect higher than forbearance, no value more
emphatic than manners, no relation lower than anger, no beauty more attractive than
intellect, no bad deed worse than lying, no protection more effective than quietness, no
dress more beautiful than health, and no absence closer than death.
O people, whoever has walked on the surface of the Earth will certainly fall to its depth.
The night and day are speedy in demolishing lives, and for every spark of life there is
nourishment. For every seed there is a consumer, and you are the nutrients of death.
Most certainly he who recognizes time does not neglect to get prepared (for the
1

Translator's Note: Quran: 33:56.

60

Hereafter). No one escapes death, neither the rich through wealth, nor the poor through
poverty.
O people! Whoever fears his Lord refrains from oppression. He who does not guard his
tongue, obscene language overtakes him; and he who does not know the difference
between right and wrong belongs to the animal kingdom.
How small is suffering compared to tomorrow's need (the Day of Judgment)! How far it
is! Your ignorance (of God) is caused by your defiance, and your sins. How close it: the
comfort from exhaustion and the misery from ease. Calamity is not calamity if it is
followed by Paradise and the welfare is not welfare if it is followed by Hell. Every ease
other than Paradise is inconsiderable and every tribulation other than the Hell is relief.
28. Tamim ibn Abd Allah ibn Tamim al-Qarashi (may Allah be pleased with him) said: My
father related to me on the authority of Hamdan ibn Sulayman al-Naysaburi, on the authority of
Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm that

C G G G d G > A
: G I G G H G _ G

G >
Z 2
H G% H H G H H G G G~G d % % d
H 2 m E G 2 m E G C 2 m E G
E G G!" G G" H G " _

H G% H H G%G G x G H G 3/4

G G G H G q H G2 G G

G G H G~G I G H G2 G G GG Z G H

G2 G G GG G G C G Z G
H G G C G 2 G G H
G G L H G G G2 G

H G" G G G Z G >

G H G G L I H ~G" .

G C G 3 2G H G L G 2 G IGG I _ 2 G G G"

H G G I G G G 2G C G 3 H G" G

G >

C d G%G G G" 3 $ H G 3 H H 3 $ H H

61

I entered the presense of al-Mamum while Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) was with him. AlMamum said to him: "O son of the Messenger of Allah (SA), do you not say that the
Prophets are infallible?"
He (AS) replieertainly."
He says that he asked him (AS) about some verses from the Quran. Among his
questions was: "Then tell me about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High, regarding
Ibrahim (AS): So when the night overshadowed him, he saw a star; said he: Is this my
Lord?"1 Hence, (Ali) al-Rida (AS) responded:
Ibrahim (AS) was faced with three types of people: the first worshiped Venus, the
second worshipped the moon, and the third worshiped the sun. This was when the
came out of the den in which he was hiding. So when the night overshadowed him, he
saw the planet Venus, and said: this is my Lord, as a denial and inquiry So when it set,
he aid: I do not love the setting one,2 because setting is one of the attributes of the
created [muhdath] and not from the attributes of the Eternal [qadim].
Then when he saw the moon rising, he asked: Is this my Lord? He said this as both
denial and inquiry. So when it set, he said: If my Lord had not guided me I should
certainly be of the erring people.3 Then when the day began and he saw the sun rising,
he said: This is my Lord. This is greater than Venus and the moon. He (AS) said this as
denial and inquiry and not as information and approval.
So when it set, he said to all three types of people from the worshippers of Venus, the
moon and the sun: O my people! Surely I am clear of what you set up (with Allah).
Surely I have turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him who originated the Heaven
and the Earth, and I am not of the polytheists.4
Verily, Ibrahim (AS) intended to clarify for them the invalidity of their religion, and prove
to them that worshipping Venus, the Moon, and the Sun was wrong. Rather, service
belongs only to their Creator, the Creator of the Heavens and the Earth. The argument
he brought forth was inspired by Allah, the Mighty and High: And this was Our
argument which we gave to Ibrahim against his people.5
Al-Mamum said: "For Allah's sake continue, O son of the Messenger of Allah!"
The Compiler of this book says: The tradition is detailed; we have extracted from it the
required passage. I have transmitted all of it in the book Uyun Akhbar al-Rida (AS).
29. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said on the authority of al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan ibn Aban, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Auramah, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn al-Hakam ibn Zuhayr,
on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Jarir al-Abdi saying that

_ G C C C G H m
% H G G2 G G_ 2

I G % C % H E 4 C % G G% m G
G O

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 6:76.
Translator's Note: Quran: 6:76.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 6:76.
4
Translator's Note: Quran: 6:78-9.
5
Translator's Note: Quran: 6:83.
.
2

62

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) used to say:
All praise be to Allah who cannot be sensed, felt or touched, as He cannot be perceived
by the five senses. Imagination cannot grasp Him. Tongues cannot describe Him.
Everything that can be sensed is a creation. All praise be to Allah who was when there
was nothing but He. He made all things according to a design. He knows what has been
and what will be.
30. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamadani (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Ali ibn
Ibrahim ibn Hashim said on the authority of his father, on the authority of al-Qasim ibn Yahya,
on the authority of his grandfather al-Hasan ibn Rashid, on the authority of Yaqub ibn Jafar
that

G G7 % H G 2G _ }
% 2 3 E* G E G

E G E G H G C ! 2 3

% G G G G%G G 3

% m

I head Abu Ibrahim Musa ibn Jafar (AS) when he was talking to a Christina monk. He
said the following during the debate.
Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is Higher and Greater than to be limited to limbs,
movement or measure. Imaginations cannot reach Him and minds cannot encompass
Him. He revealed His Exhortations, Promises, Threats, and Commands without mouth
and tongue. However, when He wills anything, He says to it "Be," according to the
message He decreed in the (Diving) Tablet.
31. Ahmad ibn Harun al-Fami (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Muhammad ibn Abd
Allah ibn Jafar ibn Jami' al-Himyari on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ahamad
ibn Muammad ibn Isa, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu
Umayr, on the authority of a number of them that

.

G I % 3 n

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) saie who compares Allah with His Creation is an
infidel; and he who denies His Omnipotence is an unbeliever."
32. My father; and Abd al-Walid ibn Muhammad ibn Abdus al-Attar (may Allah have mercy
on them both) said: Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Qutaybah said on the authority of al-Fadl ibn
Shadhan, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr that

63

H G _ G G % L }

G ! o

L G H m G H Ga2 G G H G O
m G H G q m G H G G m

I G H G C G G H G

G%G G 3 G% _ % H
2 G H

G 2 G
% G 3

I H G " G G ~ I G H G " E I G H G " E G
G G !
>

G % 2 4 G H H

I entered into the presence of My Master Musa ibn Jafar (AS) and said to him: "O son
of the Messenger (SA)! Teach me about Divine Unity." Hence, he (AS) said:
O Abu Ahmad! When it comes to Divine Unity, do not go beyond what Allah, the
Exalted, has mentioned in His Book, otherwise you will perish. Know that Allah, the
Exalted, is One, Unique, Everlasting. He begets not so He may be inherited, nor is He
begotten so He may have an associate. He has not taken a wife, a son or an associate.
He is the Living that does not dies. He is the Omnipotent that is never powerless. He is
the Subduer who is never overwhelmed. He is the Clement who does not hasten. He is
the Eternal who does not perish. He is the Permanent who does not pas away. He is the
Firm who does not decline. He is the All-Sufficient who is never in need. He is the
Almighty who is never abased. He is the All-Knowing who is never ignorant. He is the
Just who never oppresses. He is the Magnanimous who is never miserly. Verily, He is
He whom intellects cannot anticipate. He is not located in imaginations. He is not
encompassed by region. He is not contained in any place.
Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends (all) vision; and He is the Knower of
subtleties, the Aware.1 Nothing whatsoever is like unto Him, and He is the all-Hearing,
the all-Seeing.2 Nowhere is there a secret counsel between three persons but He is the
Fourth of them, not (between) five but He is the Sixty of them, nor less than that nor
more but He is with them where so ever they are.3 He is the First who has nothing prior
to Him, and the Last who has nothing after Him. He is without beginning, and the rest
are creations with beginnings. Exalted is He, the Mighty, the Great, from the attributes
of creation!
1

Translator's Note: Quran: 6:103.
Translator's Note: Quran: 42:11.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 58:7.
2

64

33. Abu Said Muhammad ibn al-Fadl ibn Muhammad ibn Ishaq al-Mudhakkir famous as Abu
Said the teacher [al-Muallim] in Naysabur said: Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Sufyan said: Ali
ibn Salmah al-Layfi said: Ismail ibn Yahya ibn Abd Allah related to on the authority of Abd
Allah ibn Talhah ibn Hujaym that Abu Sinan al-Shaybani Said ibn Sinan said on the authority
of al-Dahhak, on the authority of al-Nizal ibn Sabrah that

GG G EqG G G _ G G!" G I :

GE O E G G O ! 2 3 C

Z E G E 2 G G 2 2 2 %

.E _ I % >

A Jewish man came to Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) and asked: "O Commander of the
Faithful! Since when has our Lord existed?"
Ali (AS) replied:
It is certainly said when was it' for a thing that was not there and then was there.
However, our Lord, the Blessed and Exalted, had existed, does exist and will exist
without occurrence. He existed without quality. He has always existed with eternity and
without quality. He has always existed. There is no beginning for Him. He is prior to the
beginning. He is without a beginning and an end [ghayah]. He is the End and there is no
end to Him. He is the End that ends all. Thus, He is the End of all Ends.
34. Abu al-Abbas al-Fadl ibn al-Fadl ibn alAbbas al-Kindi related to me in which he has
permitted me [ajaza] in Hamdan in the year 354 AH that Muhammad ibn Sahl that is al-Attar
al-Baghdadi said word for word from his book in the year 305 AH that Abd Allah ibn
Muhammad al-Balawi said: Umarah ibn Zayd related to me on the authority of Amar ibn
Muhammad ibn Sasaah ibn Sawhan that My father related to me on the authority of Abu alMutamar Muslim ibn Aws who said

G G _I G % H d G H }
C G G G G7 E G G > A

H H % H % H G H2 % Y G

E 2 G Z E E G I G GE H G E G G H G H

E G *
2 E G I E G G H E G G

>
IG 3H G % 3 I % G 3 G

G G G E G G G _

3
65

G H 3
G A

% G 3

m _ G E H G G G

G H C G% _ G%G G 3
I d G O IG G G7 G G G G L G 2 G

G7 G G I 2 G G G I G
G O I
m I G
H G G G G 2 G G " E H G G G
G G E G _ G G%2

% 3 d H H % E HG % 2 L G O G E H G E

H G % G " G G%G G E G G % G % G E G G _ G7 H 3

2

H G 7 % G O m

>

G >

G _ G ! % 2
. 2 G G I G % G " H >

I attended a gather of Ali (AS) in the Mosque of al-Kufah. There a man stood up whose
color was pale, as if he was a Yemeni Jew, and said: "O Commander of the Faithful!
Describe your Creator, and praise Him for us such that we may see Him." Hence, Ali
(AS) praised his Lord, and exalted His Greatness, the Mighty and High, in the following
words:
All praise be to Allah, who is the First not from something, nor hidden in something,
and who does not vanish nor unite with something. He is not an imaginary delusion. He
is neither a shape that He may be watched, not a body so He may have parts. He is not
with an end that He may terminate. He is not accidental [muhdath] so He may be seen.
He is neither covered that He may be uncovered, not is He with veils so He may be
comprised. He was there, but no space was there to carry Him in its sides, nor any
carrier to life Him with its power. Neither has He come into being after not being there.
In fact, the imaginations are baffled to assume a shape for the One who formed all
things and is still without space, and does not decline with the variation of time. He
does not transform from one quality to another. He is far from the supposition of
hearts. He is Exalted above all things and varieties. He is the Single, and the Knower of
the Unseen. Thus, the meanings of the creation are negated from Him, and their secrets
are not hidden from Him.
He is the Known without quality. He is not perceived through the senses and not
compared with people. Eyes do not perceive Him. Thoughts cannot encompass Him.
Intellects cannot assess Him, and imaginations cannot imagine Him. Hence, any
likeness of Him conceived by the intellect is limited. And how could He be described
with shapes and praised with eloquent tongues?
He neither occurred in things, so it may be said that He is in them, nor left them, that it
may be said that He is obvious. Neither is He free from them so it may be said where.'
66

He is neither so close to them as to stick to them, nor so far from them as to be split.
But He is in the things without quality. He is closer to us than our jugular vein, and
further ways than what is most far. He has neither created things with the origin of
eternity, nor from prior examples. In fact, He created what He created, and made it
strong. He imagined what He imagined and beautified it.
Thus, praise be Him who is Unique in His Elevation. Hence, nothing can refuse to Him
His decree. Nor does He gain anything through the obedience of His Creation. His
Response to callers is quick. The Angels in the Heavens and the Earth are submissive
to Him. He addressed Moses with words without limbs, instruments, lips or uvulas.
Praise be Him and Exalted is He from attributes. Thus, whoever supposes that the God
of the Creation is limited then he is ignorant of God, the Creator.
The Compiler of this book says: The sermon is detailed; we have extracted from it the required
passage.
35. Abu al-Abbas Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taliqani (may Allah be pleased with
him) said: Abu Ahmad Abd al- Aziz ibn Yahya al-Jaludi al-Basri said in Basra that
Muhammad ibn Zakariyyah al-Jawhari al-Ghulabi al-Basri said: al-Abbas ibn Bakkar al-Dibbi
said: Abu Bakr al-Hudhali on the authority of Ikrimah said

E H2 1/2

G H 2C GL G G % H G" G

G G % G H G " G % G G G 2 d G G

H G b G G G G7 Z G G I G G GZ O

>

G2 H G " % G " >

While Ibn Abbas was addressing the people, Nafi ibn al-Azraq stood up and said: "O
son of Abbas! You give verdicts on ants and lice, so will you not describe to us the
God that you serve,"
So Ibn Abbas bowed down his head in silence to exalt Allah, the Mighty and High.
Al-Husayn ibn Ali (AS) was sitting on the side, who saiome to me, O son of alAzraq!."
He replieam not asking you."
Then Ibn Abbas said: "O son of al-Azraq! Verily, he from the Household of
Prophethood, and they (the household members) are the Heirs of (Prophetic)
Knowledge."
Thus, Nafi ibn al-Azraq turned towards al-Husayn (AS), so al-Husayn said to him:

O Nafi! Verily, he who bases his religion on analogy is still immersed in the world. He
is straying away from the (right) path, transient in the deviation (from that which is
right), is leading astray from the way, and is saying that which is not nice.
O son of al-Azraq! I am describing my god with what He Himself has described Himself
and I am presenting Him with what He presented Himself. He cannot be perceived with
the senses and cannot be compared with the people. He is near but not attached. He is
far, but not cut off. He is United, but not divided into parts. He is known by signs and
attributed by symbols. There is not god but He, the Great, the Most High.
36. Ahmad ibn Harun al-Fami (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Muhammad ibn Abd
Allah ibn Jafar al-Himyari said on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Mohammad ibn Khalid al-Barqi, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of al-Mufaddal ibn Umar that

4 % I G 2 m Z % G 2 m ! 2 3 H G " G I G%G G

. G%G G G I G G7 C
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
He who anthropomorphizes Allah with His Creation is an infidel. Verily, Allah, the
Blessed and the Exalted, does not resemble anything and nothing resembles Him.
Everything that is imagined is other than Him.
The Compiler (may Allah have mercy on him) of this book says: The proof that nothing
resembles Allah, the Glorified, in His Creation in any dimension, is that there is no dimension
for any of His Actions except that it has a beginning [muhdathah]. Therefore, it Allah, High be
His Praise, resembles anything from His Creation, then that would certainly give Him a
beginning... At the same time, two things which are intellectually similar require one ruling due
to their similarity. And the proof had been established for Allah, the Mighty and High, being
without beginning [qadim], It is impossible that He may be Eternal in one dimension, and have
beginning another.
Another proof that Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, is without beginning is that if He had a
beginning then there must have been someone that gave Him a beginning, because an action
requires an agent. And surely the word about one who gave beginning to Him is like the word
about Him. And in this (case) there is existence of an eternal before an eternal that has no
prior (to Him). This is impossible. Hence, it is correct that there must be an Eternal Creator.
And if it is so, then whatever demands the eternity of that creator and indicates upon him, also
demands the eternity of the Creator we believe in and indicates upon Him.
37. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on him) and
Ali ibn Abd Allah al-Warraq both said: Muhammad ibn Harun al-Sufi said: Abu Turab Ubayd
Allah ibn Musa al-Rawyani said on the authority of Abd al-Azim al-Hasani that

G _ G G G H G _ G G_ L : _ G G G2 G GG G 2
Z C G L GG G Z 2 G! G *
H EqG G G _ G G G G _ G G G H
68

G G ~G" G G % L

G H G G 4 G%G G G ! 2 3 H G " ~G" L GG >

E E G G % H H _ G G _

3 % 2 Z H H G " % G % G % G E 4 _ C G G

C G GG G G G G G H G ! G G H G " G G G G!" H G _GH

H E G H H G C G H H H EqG G

G G G L H E G H H

H G o G G % % H G
k

C H G C G ! I H G H G " > L Z Z L G Z Z G
H H G " G G7 G H G " G G I G G I G

G G I G C H H H G 2 G G O }
n

G G H G% L 2G G2G G G H G G G GG E H C G

I entered into the presence of My Master Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Musa ibn Jafar
ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (peace be on them), when
he saw me, he said: "Welcome, O Abu al-Qasim! You are our true lover."
So I said to him: "O son of the Messenger of Allah! I intend to present to you my
religion. If it is acceptable then I will remain firm on it until I meet Allah, the Mighty and
High."
Thus, he said: "Tell me, O Abu al-Qasim." Hence, I explained:
Verily, I proclaim: Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is One God. There is nothing
whatsoever like unto Him. He is beyond the two limitations; the limitation of annulment
and the limitation of anthropomorphism. Verily, He has neither body nor an image,
neither an accidental quality nor a substance. In fact, He is the Creator of bodies,
images, accidental qualities, and substances. He is the Lord of Everything, their Master,
their Creator, and is the One who gave them beginning.
69

Verily, Muhammad (SA) is His Servant and His Messenger, the Seal of the Messengers;
hence, there is no Messenger after him till the Day of Judgment. I profess: Verily, the
Imam, the Caliph and the Legal Guardian [wali al-amr] after him (SA) is the Commander
of the Faithful Ali in Abu Talib (AS) then al-Hasan, then al-Husayn, then Ali ibn alHusayn, then Muhammad ibn Ali, then Jafar ibn Muhammad, then Musa ibn Jafar,
then Ali ibn Musa, then Muhammad ibn Ali, then you, O my Master.
So he (AS) said: "And after me is al-Hasan my son and what shall happen to people for
the one after him?" He said: I asked him (AS): "And what is that O Master?"
He replied: "Because he cannot be seen and it is not permissible to mention him with
his name until he reappears. Then he will fill the Earth with peace and justice like it will
be filed with injustice and oppression."
Then I asked him:
I acknowledge and declare: Verily, to befriend them is to befriend Allah, to bear enmity
towards them is to bear enmity with Allah, to obey them is to obey Allah, and to disobey
them is to disobey Allah. And I affirm: Verily, the Ascension (of Muhammad (AS) to the
Heavens) [Mi'raj] is true, the questioning in the grave is true; Heaven is true, and Hell is
true. The Bridge (Sirat) is true,and the Balance is true. And there can be no doubt about
the coming of the Inevitable Hour and that Allah shall raise the dead from their graves.
And II assert that the obligations after the guardianship [Wilayah] are the prayers
[Salat], alms [Zakat], fasting [Sawm], Hajj, Jihad, as well as enjoining good and
forbidding evil.
Thus, Ali ibn Muhammad (AS) said: "O Abu al-Qasim! By Allah, this is the religion of
Allah, which he wishes for His Servants. Remain firm in this (religion). May Allah keep
you firm on the established word in this life and in the Hereafter."

Chapter Three: Mana al-Wahid wa-al-Tawhid wa-al -Muwahhid The Definition of One, Divine Unity, and the Believer in Divine Unity
- 3 traditions

1. My Father (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Abu Hashim al-Jafar that

. G H G G G G G G

I asked Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn Ali the Second (AS), "What is the meaning of the
One [al-Wahid]? He replied, "He is the One whose Divine Unity [al-Wahdaniyyah] is
professed by all tongues."
2. Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Isam al-Kulayni; and Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) both said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub al-Kulayni, on the authority of
Ali ibn Muhammad said; and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan all of whom on the authority of Sahl
ibn Ziyad, on the authority of Abu Hashim al-Jafari that

G% G G G H GG G ~H }

H I d G H H G G H G

. H >
I asked Abu Jafar the Second (AS), "What is the meaning of the One?"
He answered, "He is the One whose Divine Unity [al-Tawhid] is profess by all. As Allah,
the Mighty and High, says: And if you as them, Who created the Heavens and the Earth,
they will certainly say, Allah.1
3. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taliqani (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Said ibn Yahya
al-Buzuri said: Ibrahim ibn al-Haytham al-Baladi said: My father said on the authority of alMuafi ibn Imran, on the authority of Israil, on the authority of al-Miqdad ibn Shurayh ibn
Hani', on the authority of his father that

H G " GG G GG G G G!" G Z G

GG G qG G C G GG G G%G 3 C G

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 26:61, 31:25, 39:38 & 43:9.

G G H G7 H G " C G

G% G G H H d G%G G G I H H G G I G G I E

G%G G m G G G O

% H G G% I G G G H G%G G
G H G G G G O E G

G7 % G G G O G%G G G H G I H ! G C H % G
E E G7 G % H G%G G m GC H H % H G" G G O C G % 2 G G

On the Day of Battle of Jamal, a Bedouin stood before the Commander of the Faithful
(AS), and asked, "O Commander of the Faithful! Do you say that Allah is One?"
He says: the people attacked him saying that "O Bedouin! Do you not see the state of
mind of the Commander of the Faithful?"
So the Commander of the Faithful (AS) saieave him alone. Verily, what this
Bedouin seeks to know is what we are seeking to establish by fighting these people."
He (the Commander of the Faithful) then said:
O Bedouin! The statement that Allah is One' is of four types: Two types cannot be
applied to Allah, the Mighty and High; while the two other types can be applied to Him.
As for the two types of statements that cannot be applied to Him, the first is the claim
that Allah is One in a numerical sense. Such a statement cannot be applied to Allah,
because as the One, He has no second, and He is not subject to mathematic
calculation. Do you not see that he who claims that Allah is the third of the three has
disbelieved (in Him)?
The second statement which cannot be applied to Allah is the claim that He is One with
humankind. Since He derives the species from the genus, He cannot be described
through anthropomorphism [tashbih]. Our Lord is Higher and more Exalted than this.
As for the two types of statements that can be applied to Allah, the first would be to say
that He is the One who resembles none. The second statement which can apply to Allah
is the statement that He, the Mighty and High, is Alone, in the sense that He is
Indivisible in Existence [wujud], Intellect [aql], and Thought [wahm]. That is another
dignified description of our Lord, he Mighty and High.
The Compiler of this book says: I have heard the following from a person I trust due to the fact
that he is religious and due to his mastery of both Classical and colloquial Arabic:
Verily, the words one, two three, and so forth, were developed in order to express quantity,
and not to express quality. They have no meaning outside of counting, and determining units
of measure in the tens, hundreds, and thousands.
Likewise, when someone intends to inform another person about the exact quantity of a thing,
he names it by its specific name, and applies the number one' to it, describing its quantity, as
opposed to its attributes. This is why one says: one pound [dirham], and one intends only a
pound, while it could be a pound in weight or a pound in number. So, if the persons want to

convey the meaning of weight, he would say: one pound in weight, but if he wants to convey
the meaning of number, he says; one pound in number.
On the basis, if a person says "one man," the man can be one in the sense that he is one
human being, as opposed to two. Or, he could be unique in merits, unique in knowledge,
unique in generosity or unique in bravery. Thus, if a person intends to convey the sense of
quantity, he says: "one man;" in the sense that he is one man as opposed to two men.
However, if he intends to describe someone's excellence, he says: he is one of a kind (there is
no one' like him). This indicates that nobody compares to him. If he wanted to stress the
knowledge of a person, he would say: he is unique in knowledge. Hence, since the word one'
can indicate excellence, as well as quantity, it means that whoever called him one' under
these circumstances meant that there he had no second. In other words, there was no scholar
like him, and no person like him in quality.
When this is not the case, then it is correct to say that one' merely indicates quantity.
Otherwise, there, would be no sense in saying one of a kind' or limiting the meaning of
knowledge or bravery. It has been established that when a person uses the word "one" on its
own, it indicates quantity. However, depending on the context, it can also mean "one" or
"unique" in knowledge, excellence, and generosity.
As we have already explained, one' pound [dirham] can be one pound in weight, one pound
in number or count. It can also be two pounds in weight, and one pound in number or count.
Sometimes it is six dawaniq,1 and sixty fulus,2 and has many fractions. Likewise, a slave can
be one salve, and not two slaves; a person can be one person, and not two people, when in
reality they are composed of many parts which are composed of many more parts.
In this sense, the slave cannot be one.' Verily, the slave is not one or unique [wahid], because
every slave has someone who is similar to him. It makes perfect sense for a slave to have
someone who is the same as him in attributes and qualities. Hence it is necessary that Allah,
the Mighty and High, be Unique in His Attributes and Most Beautiful Names. This is what
makes Him truly One God, who has no likeness; the One, who has no associates; and there is
no god but He.
Therefore, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is the One, the Eternal3 [qadim], and there is no
god but He. He is Unique, none is eternal but He, the Existing, who does not change, and is
not subject to change. He is the One beyond compare. Nothing is similar to Him. Nothing
resembles Him. And nothing is like Him. Thus, He is an Indivisible Being in both Essence and
Imagination, a Think unlike other Things, and the One and Only True God. There is no god but
Him!
In conclusion, in Islamic Law, the titles the One [Wahid], and the Unique [Ahad], apply
specifically to Him, and are excluded from others. None but Allah, the Mighty and High, can
bear these titles. And, as we have already explained, Allah is a name which can only applied
to Him.
In addition to these examples, a thing can sometimes be counted with something which is
similar to it. It is said: this is a man, these are two men, and these are three men; this is a
slave, this is black, these are two slaves, these two are black. Therefore, it is not permissible
to say: these are two gods as there is no god but the One God. Thus, Allah cannot be counted
in this manner, nor does He enter numbers in this form in any way.
Sometimes a thing is counted with something different to it. Hence, it is said: this is the color
white, these are white and black colors; this is a recent one [muhdath], these are two recent
ones; these are not two ones, and these are not two creatures; One of them is Eternal, and
the other is recent; one of them is the Lord, and the other is the servant.

1

Translator's Note: Dawaniq (plural of daniq) is an ancient coin; six dawaniq made up one dirham.
Translator's Note: Fulus (plural of fils) is a small coin; sixty of these make up one dirham.
3
Translator's Note: The word "Eternal" isa translation of qadim means without beginning.
2

So, on this basis, it is acceptable to apply numbers to Him as Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
has said: Nowhere is there a secret counsel between three persons but He is the Fourth of
them, not (between) five but He is the Sixth of them, nor less than that nor more but He is with
them wheresoever they are.1 Similarly, the statement Verily', he is one man' does not merely
stress his excellence. Likewise, our statement, so and so in number two to so and so,' does
not simply indicate that he exist. It only does so when it is specified that he is second to him in
excellence, in perfection, or in knowledge.'
As for the Unity of Allah, Exalted is His Remembrance, it refers to the Unity between His
Exalted Attribute, and His Most Beautiful Names. He is One, without associates, and without
similarity. He who affirms this about the Mighty and High on the basis of His Exalted Attribute
and Most Beautiful Names with conviction is a true monotheist. Hence, the one who fails to
recognize Allah, the Mighty and High, through his Exalted Attributes, and Most Beautiful
Names, does not affirm His Oneness, and is not a true monotheist.
Sometimes the ignorant people say: Verily, a monotheist is one who professes the Oneness of
Allah even if He does profess the Unity of His Attributes. The ignorant people are told: You
have rejected Divine Unity. Whoever claims that His Lord is One God, and One Being, and
then applies His Attributes to other than Him, is an idolater, an anthropomorphist, and a nonMuslim according to the consensus of every school of thought in the Ummah. Such is the
case, even if he claims that His Lord id One God, One Thing and One Being.
Accepting Divine Unity, while failing to accept the Divine Attributes, is like saying Allah is
separate from His Attributes whereas Divine Unity is the Unity between Allah and His
Attributes. I is impossible for another god to exist. Allah is One God without partners, and
without similarity. If He was not United with His Attributes, then he would have an associate or
something similar to Him. Likewise, if a servant did not embody him own attributes, another
servant would have to exist. As a result, he would not be one servant, but two servants.
Hence, anyone who professes that Allah is One with His Attributes is a true monotheist, and a
Believer in Divine Unity.
Allah, the Mighty and High, unites every attribute which is applicable exclusively to Him. These
attributes include the Existent since it cannot be conceive that He can dissolve into something
or that something can dissolve into Him. Nor is it conceivable that His Existence can come to
an end, that He can be destroyed, or that He can suffer any type of decline. He is the First of
the First, the Last of the Last, and the Omnipotent.
He is not subject to weakness or inability. He is the Most Powerful of the Powerful, and the
Subduer [qahir] of all Subduers. He is Omniscient: nothing is hidden from Him, and nothing
escapes Him. He is the Most Learned of the Learned. Ignorance, mistakes, errors, doubts,
and forgetfulness cannot be attributed to Him. He is the Ever-Living. He is not subject to sleep
or death. Nothing benefits Him nor can anything harm Him. He is the One who Remains, the
Most Complete of the Complete, and the Doer who is never occupied. Nothing incapacitates
Him nor does He miss anything. He is the Lord of the First and Last, the Best of Creators, and
the Foremost of those who take account.
He is the Wealthy One [ghani], devoid of nothing. He is the Self-Sufficient [mustaghni], devoid
of need. He is the Just, devoid of criticism and defects. He is the Wise One, devoid of
foolishness. He is the Most Merciful, whose Mercy cannot be increased kindness.2 He is the
Forbearing [halim], devoid of emotion and haste. He is the Most Just of the Just, the Best of
Judges, and the Foremost of those who take Account. This is because the first of the First
cannot be but One. He is the Omnipotent, the Most Learned, the Best of Judges, the Best of

1

Translator's Note: Quran :58:7.
Translator's Note: This is an indication that Allah does not go through human states of love and mercy, nor does His Mercy
increase or decrease, as He has no movement or improvement.

2

Creators, and all such descriptions are correct.1 Favor is from Allah, as is protection and
guidance.

1

Translator's Note: The author is using the superlative [afal al-tafadil].

Chapter Four: The Commentary of Chapter 112 the Unity [al-Tawhid]
- 15 traditions

In the name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful. Say: He, Allah, is One. Allah
is He on whom all depend. He begets not, not is He begotten. And none is like Him.1
1. Abu Muhammad Jafar ibn Ali ibn Ahmad the Jurist a resident of Qum then Ailaf, said: Abu
Said Abdan ibn al-Fadl related to me that Abu al-Hasan Muhammad ibn Yaqub ibn
Muhammad ibn Yusuf ibn Jafar ibn Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Abd Allah ibn
Jafar ibn Abu Talib in the town of Khujandah related to me that Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn
Ahmad ibn Shuja' al-Farghani related to me that Abu al-Hasan Muhammad ibn Hammad
al-Anbari related to mein Mist that Ismaiil ibn Abd al-Jalil al-Barqi, on the authority of Abu
al-Bakhtari Wahab ibn Wahab al-Qarashi, on the authority of Abut Abd Allah al-Sadiq
Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) that his father

! 2 3 G G G7
G G G H G G 2 G _ 4G
G G 2 E G G G H G%G E H G }

G!" G " LE G Z % G 3 I EqG O G!" G

H G!" G " H _ G qGG O
G IG I G $ I 2H H H G

G 3 I ! 2 3 d G%G % d % G H 3 G H

G G ! % H _ G G G qGG O G!" G " GLG
._ G 2 G

Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Blessed
and the Exalted: Say: He Allah is One. Therefore, He (AS) said:
Say [qul] means relate to the people what we have revealed to you, and informed you
about, regarding the meaning of the letters we have recited to you, so that you may
guide those who listen and bear witness. The verse in question is a metonymical
expression indication to the unseen One [ghaib].

1

Translator's Note: Quran 112: 1-4.

The letter [ha'] (in[huwa]) means motionless. The (letter) [waw] means unperceivable by
the sense just like the word this' [hadha] means witnessed by means of the sense. This
is because the unbelievers described their gods by means of perception. Hence, they
would say: These are our gods who are sensed and perceived by the eyes. Therefore, O
Muhammad, point to your God that you call pon so that we see Him, perceive Him, and
be amazed by Him.
Thus, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, revealed: Say He Allah is One. Therefore, the [ha]
referes to the Motionless while the [waw] refers to the One who is Above Sensual
Perception. In fact, He is the creator of the Senses, and He perceives all vision.
2. My father related to me, on the authority of his father, who said

Y Z G _ % L E G E 2 G G7 A

G L _ C G G! G G I L 2 H H G " G

GG G H G " E G~ G

H % G _ G G m G

% G" % H G I H H G " % G " G G H G G >

2 GG G G H 2 >

.>
G G % G%G % d G H

G 2 . G G G G G G % G G 2
G 2

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) said:
I was al-Khidr (AS) in a dream the night before the Battle of Badr. I asked him: "Teach
me something that will make me victorious over my enemies."
Consequently, he replied: "Say: O He! O One! There is no one but He!"
When I got up in the morning I related this to the Messenger of Allah (SA), so he (SA)
said to me: O Ali, you have been taught the greatest name (al-ism al-azam]."
Hence, it was on my tongue on the day of the battle of Badr.
The Commander of the Faithful (AS) read "The Chapter of Divine Unity," and when he
finished he said: "O He! O One! There is no one but He! Forgive me, and help me
against the unbelievers."
Ali (AS) used to say this in the Battle of Siffin while he was giving chase (to the
enemies), so Ammar ibn Yasir asked him: "O Commander of the Faithful! What is the
meaning of this expression?"
He (AS) answeret is the greatest name of Allah. It is the main pillar of Divine Unity:
there is not god but He."

Then he (AS) read: Allah bears witness that there is no god but He, and (so do) the
Angels and those possessed of knowledge, maintaining His Creation with justice; there
is no god but He, the Mighty and the Wise,1 and the last verse of the chapter "The
Banishment" [al-Hashr].
Then he dismounted (his horse) and prayed four units [rakat] of prayer before
noon[zawwal].
Al-Baqir (AS) said: The Commander of the Faithful (AS) said: "The meaning of Allah is
the One who is worshipped' and the One who taken and served as God.' Allah is
Hidden from the grasp of vision, and concealed from both imagination and thought."
Al-Baqir (AS) said: The meaning of Allah is the One who is worshiped.' Creation cannot
grasp His Essence or understand His Nature. The Arabs say "he is overwhelmed' when
someone is amzed with something which his knowledge does not comprehend. And
they also say "he is confused" when someone is frightened of something. Therefore,
God [ilah] is hidden from the sensory perception of the created.
Al-Baqir (AS) said: The Alone [Ahad], the Peerless [Fard], the Unique. The One [Wahid],
and the Alone [Ahad] have the same meaning that the Unique who has no like. Divine
Unity is the affirmation of the Absolute Unity of Allah. For this reason they say: The first
of numbers is one, but the One is not a number because numbers do not apply to Him.
As they only apply to two and above. Therefore, the meaning of His Word: Allah is One
is that the worshipped One cannot be perceived by His Creation. The encompassment
of His existence is exclusive to Himself. He is far above the attributes of His Creation.
3. Al-Baqir (AS) related: my father Zayn al-Abidin (AS) said that

% G H H : % H E G G G G%G

G 2

d G H H G G H H

C G G%G G G O H m % G O G H G H

G 2 .

G H H G G G G! H G G
G 2 .G H G

G G G C G G : .E G $ % G H _
. 4 % m E 4 G % (c)

His father, al-Husayn ibn Ali (AS), said; "The Needless [al-Samad] is He who has no
deficiency [jawf]. He is the Possessor of Absolute Sovereignty. He does not eat or
drink. He does not sleep. He is devoid of needs. He does not surrender and He does not
have an end."
Al-Baqir (AS) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah (RA) used to say: "The Needless [alSamad] is He who is Independent and Self-Sufficient {Ghani] from others.
Someone other than him said: "The Needless is not subject to events and decline, and
changes do not take place in Him."
Al-Baqir (AS) Said: "The Needless [al-Samad] is the Obeyed Master who no one
commander."

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 3:18.

He (AS) said: Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-Abidin (AS) was asked about the Needless [alSamad], so he said: "The Needless is devoid of associates. Maintaining things does not
tire Him, and nothing escapes Him."
4. Wahab ibn Wahab al-Qarashi related that
Zayd ibn Ali Zayn al-Abidin (AS) said:

G H H % Z G" G H H

"When the Needless [al-Samad] intends a thing, He says: Be!' and it is. The Needless
orginaters all thing, crates them in contrast, similarity, and pairs. He is Unique in
Oneness, without opposite, similarity, likeness, or equal."
5. Wahab ibn Wahab al-Qurashi related: al-Sadiq Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) related to me
on the authority of his father al-Baqir (AS), on the authority of his father (AS) that

E G G G G!" 2 G *
G G 2 G%G E H }

G H G G G G I G" q G H G % d m

G7 m G _ L G E GG G G%G 3 G%G G 3

G 3/4
H % 2 H G " GH G H 2
H H H H 3/4
G k
G 4 % G k
3 GH G G G G G O G

G 4 G

G G 2 G G H G I 2
4 % G k
! G 2

G k

E 4 G k

G G >

G 2 GaG G G H k

H G G G G C H G G G _ G G G G G H
4 G%G3 G G G I G G G 2 E 4 E 4 G7 E 4 G G H

qG G G G H H G G%G G G G 2 G 2 G G G G

The people of Basra wrote to al-Husayn ibn Ali (AS) asking him about the Needless [alSamad]; hence, he replied to them:
In the name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful. Now to our topic: Do
not argue about the Quran, do not dispute over it, and do not speak about it without
knowledge. Verily, I have heard my grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (SA) say: "He
who interprets the Quran without knowledge will occupy a place in Hell."
Verily, Allah, Glory be Him has explained the meaning of the Needless [al-Samad], that
Allah is One. Allah is He on whom all depend. He then clarified it further and said: He
begets not, nor is He begotten. And none is like Him. The interpretation of He begets
not' is that nothing comes out of Him, like a child or a spirit, nor is He subject to
slumber, sleep, thought, anxiety, grief, joy, laughter, sadness, fear, hope, attraction,
dislike, hunger, or satiation. Exalted is He from giving birth to anything!
The interpretation of Nor is He begotten' is that He was not born from anything or
anyone. He did not originate in another thing as components originate from other
components, as animals originate from other animals, as plants originate from the
Earth, as water originates from sources, and as fruits originate from trees.
He does not depend on anything for His Existence, such as vision depends on the eyes,
hearing depends on the ears, scent depends on the nose, taste depends on the mouth,
speech depends on the tongue, intellect depends on the heart, and like fire depends on
coal, Besides Allah, nothing else in Needless.
He is neither from a thing, in a thing, or on a thing. He is the Originator and Creator of
all Things. He produces all things through His Omnipotence. He destroys what He
creates through His Will [mashiyyat], and allows things to exit through His Knowledge.
Such is Allah, on whom all depend, who begets not, nor is He begotten, the Knower of
the unseen and the seen, the Great, the Host High,1 and none is like Him.
6.
Wahab ibn Wahab al-Qurashi related
I heard al-Sadiq (AS) saying that a delegation from Palestine came to al-Baqir (AS) and
enquired about issues so he answered them. Then they asked him about the Needless [alSamad]; hence, he said:

G%G G G H G d H I d G O d
G G 2 G G G G G

G " % G 3 G H G " % G" % H G I H % G

G G IG" G H _ G qGG O G!"

_ G 3 G G%G G % H G IG" H G G G G G7 G I G
E G G G % G G H G% G G H G E G G E G G G G7
1

Translator's Note: 13:9.

80

I % 2
H G G G G G I H G" _ G G G 2 E G
% G%G Y G!" 2 G (R) G G G G G7 G G H G IG q
G G 3 G G % H G

3 H 2 3 G H H
G x % I G G G!" G (R) G _ G E H G7

H H % H G % H E G % 3nG
G G2 G H G G7 2 n

G H H G G G7 G IG q _ I G H H %H % L 2 G%G G!" G (R) G C G

_ G G _ G 2 3_ G!" 2G G % ^ G % G H H % H

G % H G%G G G H G _

G G O _ H H G H G G ! G O H H % H G%G G G

G H >

H > Z H H G ~3 $ G H a
G G G > H GE O C G

H G%G G G Z GG G _ G G G G!

G~ G 2 G~ G G m C H

H 3 G 2 H G G ~G" % G G Z Z G H G (R)

G 2 H G2
2G H Z % . G G H G H G G%G3 2G G H H G H

H H G m G H % Z 2G Z n Z

Z % G G7 % m G %

The meaning of the Needless [al-Samad] is found in the five letters of the word itself:
Alif means to ascertain His Essence [inniyyat], as in the Word of the Mighty and High:
Allah bears witness that there is no god but He,1 which means that he is not subject to
sensory perception. The lam stands for divinity [ilahiyyah] and means that He, and only
He, is Allah. The Alif and Lam are not pronounced by the tongue, and are not heard in
listening; however, they appear in writing, demonstrating that His Divinity is a Secret of
His Benevolence. The senses do not perceive them. They are not perceived in the
words of the speaker, and they are not heard by ears of the listener.

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 3:18.

81

This is because the meaning of the word God [ilah] is: the One whose Essence and
Nature cannot be perceived by the imagination or the senses. On the contrary, their
[alif, lam] appearance in writing is an indication that Allah, Glory be to Him, manifested
His Lordship through the creation of subtle spirits and unsubtle bodies. When a servant
looks at himself, he does not see his spirit in the same way that the lam does not
become evident, and is not perceived y any of the five sense. However, when he looks
at the written form, what is hidden and elegant becomes evident to him. Thus,
whenever a servant ponders the Essence of the Maker [al-bari'] and His Nature, he is
overwhelmed and amazed, as his thoughts cannot grasp the concept of God, because
He, the Mighty and High, is the Creator of Concepts. When he looks at the creation,
however, he is forced to acknowledge that the Mighty and High is the creator and
Composer of both spirits and bodies.
As for the sad, it symbolizes that He, the Mighty and High, is al-Sadiq, the Truthful. His
Words are the Truth. His Speech is the Truth. He calls upon His Servants to follow the
truth, and He has promised in truth the place of Truth. The mim symbolizes His
Kingdom [mulk], and that He is the Righteous King who surrenders not, and whose
Kingdom never declines.
And the dal symbolizes the eternity [dawam] of His Kingdom and that He, the Mighty
and High, is Eternal. Exalted be He, the Mighty and High, from being created or from
declining. He originated the Universe, and created all beings.
He (AS) then added,
If I had found a bearer for my knowledge, bestowed upon me by Allah, the Mighty and
High, I would have certainly spread Divine Unity, Islam, Faith, Religion, and Islamic law
on the basis of the word the Needless' [al-Samad]. And how could it be possible for me
to find someone to carry my knowl3edge, when even my grandfather, the Commander
of the Faithful (AS) did not find any bearer for his knowledge, causing him to sigh
deeply, and proclaim the following from the pulpit: Ask me before you lose me, for
verily I am full of knowledge. Alas I cannot find any hone who can bear it. Beware! I am
the Proof of Allah upon you. Hence, do not support the people with whom Allah is
angry. Do not support people who have no hope in the Hereafter just like the
unbelievers are hopeless like the dead. Then al-Baqir (AS) added:
Praise be to Allah who granted us favor, and success in serving Him, the Unique, on
who all depend, who begets not, nor is He begotten, and none is like Him. He kept us
away from worshipping idols. Everlasting praise be to Him, and permanent thanks be to
Him. The interpretation of His Word, the Mighty and High: He begets not, nor is He
begotten, is as follows: He, the Mighty and High, has not given birth to have a son as an
heir, nor is He begotten so that He would have a father who would share His Lordship
and Kingdom; and none is like Him, so that another would assist Him in His Rule.
7. My Father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah related to me that Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd,
on the authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the authority of al-Rabi ibn Muslim that

.% G H H G H G G G L G
When asked about the Needless [al-Samad], I heard Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim (AS) reply:
"The Needless is He who has no interior."
8. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya alAttar, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ashari, on the
82

authority of Ali ibn Ismail, on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority Abu Ayyub,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim, that

L H I 2G Z G 2 H q G Y G d I H G " : G G2 G
E H G G H H % L #$

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
The Jews asked the Messenger of Allah (SA): "Describe your Lord for us."
He (SA) did not answer them for three days persistently until this chapter from the
Quran was revealed to its end."
I asked him (AS): "Who is the Needless [al-Samad]?"
He (AS) replied: "The Needless is He who is Hollow."
9. My father (RA) related: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Abu al-Siri, on the authority of
Jabir ibn Yazid that

_ G7 ! I G a GH L 2 3
H G " GG H G E 4 }

G m E 4 C 2 m
C G I G%G H G G G 3 _ H G H 3 G
.Z G E 4 H G E 4 C

I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) regarding Diving Unity. He (AS) replied:
Verily, Allah - Blessed be the Names with which He is called upon and praised, and
Exalted be the Essence of His Greatness - is One, United in Oneness in the Greatness
of His Unity. Then He applied His Unity to His Creation. Therefore, He is One, Needless
[Samad], the Most Holy [Quddus], everything serves Him, everything depends upon
Him, and His Knowledge encompasses everything.
10. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ib Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub, on
the authority of Ali ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn al-Walid whose title is Shabab al-Sayrafi, on the authority of Dawud ibn alQasim al-Jafri that

I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS): "May I be your ransom! What is the meaning of the
Needless [al-Samad]?"
He (AS) answeree is the Master on whom all depend in major and minor."
11. Abu Nasr Ahmad ibn al-Husayn al-Marwani said: Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Sulayman
said in Faris that Muhammad ibn Yahya said: Muhammad ibn Abd Allah al-Rawasi said:
Jafar ibn Sulayman, on the authority of Yazid al-Rishk, on the authority of Matraf ibn Abd
Allah, on the authority of Imran ibn Husayn that
83

G E _ G7 G % H I d H Z G I Z H

H2 H I C G H G _ G L G C G

The Prophet (SA) sent a group for battle [sariyah], and instead Ali (AS) as its head.
When they returned, he (SA) enquired about the mission.
Hence, they answereverything went well, except that he (AS) recited (the chapter):
Say: He, Allah is One, in every prayer he lead."
He (SA) therefore, asked: "O Ali, why did you do that?"
Consequently, he (AS) answered: "Out of love for the chapter: Say: He, Allah is One."
The Prophet (SA) then said: "You only loved it, because Allah, the Mighty and High,
loved you."
12. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutwakkil (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said:
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ashari, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Hilal,
on the authority of his grandfather that

% d G E H OG G G _ G%G

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "Whoever reads (the chapter) Say: He, Allah is One,
one hundred times before he goes to sleep, Allah the Mighty and High, will forgive fifty
years worth of his sins."

13. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the
authority of al-Husayn ibn Yazid al-Nawfali, on the authority of Ismail ibn Abu Ziyad al-Sakuni,
on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS), on the authority of his father (AS) that

2 G% G HG G G O G 7 E G G H H G H H G%G

C m

.Z G O Z 2G Z G Z 2G Z G

The Prophet (SA) completed the funeral prayer for Sad ibn Muadh, and said:
Seventy thousand angels appeared any prayed for him (i.e. prayer of the deceased).
Among them was Jibrail, so I asked him: "O Jibra'il! What did he do to deserve all of
your prayers?" He replieis recitation of (the chapter) Say: He, Allah is One,
standing, sitting, riding, walking, coming and going."
84

14. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ali ibn Sayf ibn
Amirah, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ubayd that

H _ G H2 G G! _ L :

G m G H G _ G G G G H G7G G

G H . H H G G H G

n

d G " 4 G%G G H H GH G G

.
G m G

I visited (Ali) al-Rida (AS), and he said to me:
Tell the Abbasid to refrain fro talking about Divine Unity and similar subjects. He
should speak to the people about things they are acquainted with, and refrain from
things of which they have no knowledge. If they ask you about Divine Unity, then say as
Allah, the Mighty and High, has said: Say: He, Allah, is One. Allah is He on whom all
depend. He begets not, nor is He begotten. And none is like Him.1 If they ask you to
describe Allah, then say that Allah, the Mighty and High, has said: Nothing is a likeness
of Him.2 And if they ask you about Allah's ability to listen, then say what Allah, the
Mighty and High, has said: He is the Hearing, the Knowing.3 Hence, speak to the people
with what they are acquainted with.
15. Al-Husayn ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Hisham al-Mukattib (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu
Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Musa ibn Imran al-NakhaI on the authority of his uncle al-Husayn ibn
Yazid al-Nawfali on the authority of Ali ibn Salim on the authority of Abu Basir said
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:

H d Z G Z H : G G2 G

"Whoever recites the chapter: Say: He, Allah is One, once, it is as if he has recited one
third of the Quran, one third of the Torah, one third of the Bible, and one third of the
Psalms (of David)."

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 112:1-4.
Translator's Note: Quran: 42:11.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 2:137
2

85

Chapter Five: Mana al-Tawhid wa-al-Adl The Meaning of Divine
Unity and Divine Justice - 3 traditions

1. Abu al-Hasan Muhammad ibn Said ibn Aziz al-Samarqandi, the Jurist at Balkh, said: Abu
Ahmad Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Zahid al-Samarqandi with his own chain of narrators
that he did not mention up to al-Sadiq (AS) that

I m o
H G " % % d % H
% G E G G H G % G G H
d H _ _ 3 d G H H % G

.G% G G G!" q 3
A man asked Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (AS):
Verily, Divine Unity and Divine Justice are the foundations of faith. Since His
Knowledge is so great, it is not possible for even a wise man to understand it all. So,
teach me something that is easy to understand and easy to memorize.
He (AS) answered: "As for Divine Unity, do not describe your Lord the way you
describe yourself. As for Divine Justice, do not apply to your Lord any of the
shortcomings that you may apply to yourself."
2. Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Shaybani al-Mukattib, may Allah be please with him, said:
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Sahl ibn Ziyad al-Adami on the authority of Abd
al-Azim ibn Abd Allah al-Hasani on the authority of al-Imam Ali ibn Muhammad (AS) on the
authority of his father Muhammad ibn Ali on the authority of his father al-Rida Ali ibn Musa
(AS) that:

% 2 G G H G G G E > G #

% 2G G 2 _ m G n
G G Gx2 % G L H H G G
3 H G " E G 3
G G H G Gx2 G G 2 G H H G G

G 2 % G " G%G2 G 2 % 2 G (R) % G I G 2 G
Abu Hanifah was leaving the presence of al-Sadiq (AS) one day, and came across Musa
ibn Jafar (AS), so he asked him (AS): "Young man! What is the source of
insubordination?"
He (AS) answered:
86

There are three possibilities. It is either from Allah, the Mighty and High, or it is not from
Him because it does not befit the Gracious that He would punish His Servant for
something for which he is not responsible.
It could also be from both, Allah, the Mighty and High, and from the servant. This is not
the case, however, because it is not proper to suggest that he Strong would oppress
the weak.
The final option is that insubordination comes from the servant. Therefore, if Allah
punished His Servant, it is because of the sins he has committed, and if He forgives His
Servant, it is ouit of His Grace and His Generosity.
3. Abu al-Husayn Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Hirabakht al-Jiraffi al-Nassabah said: Ahmad ibn Salman
ibn al-Hasan said: Jafar ibn Muhammad al-Saigh said: Khalid al-Urani said: Hushaym said:
Abu Sufyan, the freed slave of Muzaynah that

H G G H ~G" G G 2 3 % H

. 3 H
A man came to Salman al-Farisi (may Allah have mercy on him), and said: "O Abu Abd
Allah! I am deprived of performing my nightly prayers."
Salman replied: "Then do not disobey Allah during the day. A man came to the
Commander of the Faithful (AS) and said: O Commander of the Faithful! I am deprived
of my nightly prayers.'" The Commander of the Faithful replied to him, "You are
enslaved by your sins."

Chapter Six: Innahu laysa bi-Jism wa-la-Surah. The Mighty and High
is Devoid of both Body and Image - 20 traditions

1. Hamzah ibn Muhammad al-Alawi (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman, on Muhammad ibn
Hukaym reported that

H G7 m _ G G E G G GG L

. 4 % I G 2 m H H

I described the statement of Hisham al-Jawaliqi, and what he says about a fortunate
young man, and described to him the word of Hisham ibn al-Hakam.
He (AS):" Verily, nothing resembles Allah, the Mighty and High.
2. ~Ali ibn ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub
said: Ali ibn Muhammad, who eliminated the source of report, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn al-Faraj al-Rukhkhaji that

q G C G7 E G G G G G7 G G H % d G G G!" L 2

I wrote to Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim (AS) asking hm about what Hisham ibn al-Hakam said
about the body of Allah, and what Hisham ibn Salim had said about the image of Allah.
So he (AS) replied to me: "Leave the confusion of the baffled, and take refuge in Allah
from Satan. Things are not as the two Hishams claim.
3. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar, on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad, on the authority of Hamzah ibn Muhammad that

2 q G C G G G % d G G G!" L 2
I wrote to Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim (AS) asking him about the substance and the shape of
Allah; therefore, he (AS) wrote to me: "Glory to the One who has none like Him, ad who
is devoid of both body and image."
88

4.My father (RA) that Ahmad ibn Idris said: Muhammad ibn Abd al-Jabbar, on the authority of
Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Ali ibn Abu Hamzah that

H G G G L G G G2 GG L
U

2 G%G G m I G C
m

G 4 G%G G C % G 3 C C C C G 2 G

3 G 3
I said to Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): I heard Hisham ibn al-Hakam narrating from you
that Allah, the Mighty and High, has a Needless body of Light; His Recognition is
necessary, and He grants it to whoever He desires from His Creation. He (AS) said:
Glory to Him who is known only to Himself! There is none like Him, and He is the AllHearing and the Al-Seeing. He cannot be confined, sensed, touched, or felt. The senses
perceive Him not, and nothing can comprehend Him. He does not have a body or an
image, nor lineation or delineation.
5. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar, on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail ibn Bazi,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Zayd that

G%G3 G Z G IG G Z Y G " G 1/2
G G H d G G H G % d _ G!" L G

G G H G m E GG G 2 E 4 G G%G G

% G 3 % 2 3 % G 2 G G G G%G G

.G G2 H G " % G " E G G G LG Y E G G

I came to (Ali) al-Rida (AS) asking him about Divine Unity, so he (AS) dictated to me:
All praise be to Allah, the Originator, Producer, and Innovator [Mubtadi] of all things
from the beginning by His Power and Wisdom, not from anything that could invalidate
His Invention, nor for nay wrong cause. He created whatever He wanted how He
wanted, and He did so independently in order to manifest His Wisdom, and the Reality
of His Lordship.
89

Intellects cannot grasp Him. Imagination cannot reach Him. Eyes cannot perceive Him,
and scale cannot encompass Him. Speech is incapable without Him. Eyes are
expressionless without Him, and rhetoric of description goes astray in Him.
He is hidden without a veil and is covered without a covering. He is recognized without
seeing. He is described without an image. And He is praised despite the face that He
does not possess a body. There is no god but Allah, the great, the Most Exalted."
6. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Abd Allah ibn Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi said, on the authority
of his father, on the authority of his grandfather Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Nasr, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Hukaym that

% I G 2 m H G " G % H G" G G G G % L _ G G E G G L
E E G G E G G E E G G G G

G m G G Z E C 4
.Z G2 Z G !

I described the statement of Hisham al-Jawaliqi, and narrated for Musa al-Kazim (AS)
the statement of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that He possesses a body.
Hence, he (AS) said: "Verily, nothing resembles Allah. Indecent language is better than
words which give the Creator a created body or image composed of parts. Exalted from
these, the High, the Great."
7. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah be pleased with them)
said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: on
the authority of al-Husan ibn al-Hasan, and al-Husayn ibn Ali, on the authority of Salih ibn
Abu Hammad, on the authority of Bakr ibn Salih, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Husayn
ibn Said, on the authority of Abd Allah in al-Mughayrah, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ziyad said: I heard Yunus ibn Zabyan say

% G *
G ~ G"Z G Z m G G H G " % L G G2 G L

G (R) G C E G H G % G G 2 G G

m

G" d Y H % H G G G d G G

. Z % G 2 m 4 % I G 2 m

90

I entered in the presence of Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) and told him:
Hisham ibn al-Hakam made a long statement. I will simply summarize it: He considers
Allah to be a body because things are of two types: bodies or actions of bodies. Hence,
if it is not possible for the creator to be an action, it is only possible that He be a Doer.
Then Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied: "Woe to him! Does he not know that a body is
extremely limited, and an image is absolutely limited? Hence, if a limit is possible then
increase and decrease are possible, and if increase and decrease are possible, then He
is created. I asked: "Then what should I say? He answered: He has neither body nor
image for He is the creator of bodies and images. He is devoid of parts and limits. He
does not increase, nor does He decrease. If He were as he (Hisham) says then there
would be no difference between the Creator and the created, or between the Inventor
and the invented. However, He is the Inventor. The Creator of Bodies and Images does
not resemble anything nor does anything resemble Him.
8. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah be pleased with him) said:
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail alBarmaki, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Abbas, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Abd alRahman al-Hammani that

G G G 4 G%G G G

% 3 Z I G 4 Z G Z G 3 G G _ G

G G G G G!" G G _ G H G
E E Y G7E C 3 E ^ G G G G%G3 G (R)G H 3 H G"

3

I said to Abu al-Hasan Musa ibn Jafar (AS):
Hisham ibn al-Hakam thinks that Allah is a body. There is nothing whatsoever like unto
Him, the All-knowing, the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing, the Omnipotent, the Speaker, and
the Communicator. Speech, Omnipotence, and Knowledge flow from the One Same
Source, None of these things are created.
So he (AS) said:
May Allah kill him! Does he not know that a body is limited, and that speech is other
than the speaker? Allah forbid, I am free from such words. He is devoid of both body
and image. He has not limits, and everything other than Him is created. Verily,
everything that exists is the result of His Will and Intent which is expressed without
words, the use of the tongue, or any reluctance or hesitation.
9. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Yaqub al-Kulayni, on the authority of Ali ibn Muhammad,
on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Hamdani that

91

G m I G G G H G7 G G G 2 G H G G m G H G!" L 2

2 G%_ G q m I G

.G 2
I wrote to Abu al-Hasan al-Naqi (AS), informing him that some of his following have
differences on the subject of Divine Unity. Some of them say that He has a body, while
others say that He has an image. So He (AS) wrote to me the following in his own handwriting: "Glory be to Him who has no limit and who cannot be described! There is
nothing whatsoever like unto Him; He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing." He (AS) may
have said: "the All-Seeing."
10. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with him) said:
Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said: Muhammad ibn Ahmad said: Muhammad ibn Isa said,
on the authority of Hisham ibn Ibrahim who said: al-Abbasi said

L E d d G G~ G L G G G m % L
G d m G G H G E 4 C G G H G 7 L d E 4 _ G7 E I
E 2 G" q qG G G H G7

G H G H G " G! G G G

G 2 G q E%G G >

G H G xH q E%G G >

2

I said to him (AS), meaning Abu al-hasan al-Rida (AS): "May I be your ransom! One of
your followers told me to ask you a question about something."
He (AS) said: "And who would that be?"
I said: "Al-Hasan ibn Sahl."
He (AS) asked: "What is the issue about?'
I repliet is about Divine Unity."
He (AS) said: "What about Divine Unity?"
I saie wants to know whether Allah possesses a body or not?"
He (AS) answered me:
There are three positions regarding Divine Unity. The first group attempts to describe
Him through anthropomorphism. The second group attempts to describe Him through
negation. And the third group attempts to describe Him without falling into
anthropomorphism. Describing Him through anthropomorphism is not allowed, and
describing Him through negation is not allowed. The correct position is attempting to
describe him without falling into anthropomorphism.
11. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya
al-Attar said: Muhammad ibn Ahmad said: on the authority of Imran ibn Musa, on the
92

authority of al-Hasan ibn al-Abba ibn Huraysh al-Razi, on the authority of some of our
scholars that

. C G H G G G G
The purified [Tayyib], Ali ibn Muhammad, and Abu Jafar al-Jawad (AS) both said:
"He who claims that Allah has a body, do not give him the poor-rate, and do not pray
behind him."1
12. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Muhammad
ibn Yahya al-Attar said: on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ali al-Qasani who said

2 q G G H G7 G 2 G H L 2 3

H 4
.G 2 G
I wrote to him (AS) informing him that some of the people here differed on the subject
of Divine Unity.
He (AS) replied in writing: "Glory be to Him who has no limit, and who cannot be
described! Nothing whatsoever is like unto Him. And he is the All-Hearing, and the AllSeeing."
13. Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (may Allah have mercy on him) said, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Abu Said al-Adami, on the authority of Bishr ibn Bashshar alNaysaburi that:

m I G G m I G GG H G7 G 2 G H dG G G G!" L 2

H 4 G%G G 4 %I G 2 m
.G 2 G
2 q

I wrote to Abu al-Hasan al-Naqi (AS) informing him that the people differed on the
subject of Divine Unity. Some of them say "He has a body" while others say that "He
has an image."

1

Editor's Note: According to the Salafiyyah, those who deny that Allah has a body with a face, hand, and shin are infidels.
According to the Prophet and His Family, however believing that Allah ha a body is an act of infidelity. The Shiite view is
consistent with the pure monotheism proposed by the Prophets. The Wahhabi view is clearly consistent with the Christian
view which sees god in human terms.

93

So, he (AS) wrote (backlory be to Him who has no limit, who cannot be described,
and with whom nothing resembles! Nothing whatsoever is like unto Him. And He is the
All-Hearing and the All-Seeing."
14. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar (may Allah have mercy on him)
said: on the authority of his father, on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad that

G G OG G E E H G G!" L 2

G G G G _ G_ L G (R) m I G G m

G !
G G H G L d G%_ G H G 2 _Z L
G G G m ! 2 3 E G G Z % . G

! L H H E H G m _ m G

.G 2 G

I wrote the following to Abu Muhammad al-Askari (AS) in the year 255 AH:
O my Master! Our scholars are divided on the question of Divine Unity. Some of them
say that "He has a body," while others say that "He has an image." O my Master! If you
deem it appropriates, teach me the correct view since I do not know the answer, and be
gracious to your servant.
Hence, he (AS) wrote to me the following in his own handwriting:
You enquired about Divine Unity. This is far from your honorable reach. Allah, the
Exalted, is One, Alone, and Needless. He begets not, nor is He begotten, and none is
equal unto Him. He is the Creator, and not the created. He, the Blessed and exalted,
creates bodies as He wishes. He creates images as He wishes, but He is not an image.
Exalted be His Praise, and Hallowed be His names. He is far above having a
resemblance. There is no other than Him. Nothing whatsoever is like unto Him, and He
is the All-Hearing and the All-Seeing.
15. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar said: al-Abbas ibn Maruf said: Ibn Abu Najran said, on the
authority of Hammad ibn Uthman, on the authority of Abd al-Rahim al-Qasir that

H H G G G~G IG G O G G G 2 G G!" G G G G2 L 2
q G G H G GG H qG G H G!" q 3 G G L G (R) G G H G G

G H ! 2 G q GG H G G L d G G G G 2 G
94

G%G G ! 2 3

G % G m H ! G 2 G

G%G G G H G7 G H q H G G

G % G H ! L G H % G x % G H 2 G G

I wrote a letter, and sent it by hand via Abd Al-Malik ibn Ayan to Abu Abd Allah alSadiq (AS). In it, I asked about several issues, one of which was: "Please inform me
about Allah, the Mighty and High. Can He be described with image and lineation? If this
letter reaches you, may Allah make me your ransom, write back to me with the correct
vies about Divine Unity."
So he (AS) wrote back to me, sending the letter via Abd al-Malik ibn Ayan:
May Allah have mercy on you! You have enquired about Divine Unity. Allah is Greater
than what your companions have ascribed. He is All-Hearing and All-Seeing, and there
is nothing like unto Him. Allah is greater than the descriptions of the describers, those
who describe Him inhuman terms, and those who compare Him with His creation, thus
slandering Allah.
Beware! May Allah have mercy on you! The correct view about Divine Unity is to be
found in the attributes that Allah, the Mighty and High, revealed in the Quran. Reject
anthropomorphism, and do not apply to Allah what is vain. Allah is Firmly Present.
Allah is high above the descriptions of the describers. Do not exceed the Quran, as
you will misled after the clear explanation has reached you.
16. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar (may Allah have mercy on him) said, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad, on the authority of some of our
scholars that

. G 4 G%G G 2 q G C G G G % d G G G!" L 2
I wrote to Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim (AS) asking him about the body and image of Allah, so
he replied in writing: "Glory be to Him who has nothing whatsoever like unto Him, and
who is devoid of both body and image."
17. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar (may Allah be pleased with him) said, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad al-Adami, on the authority of Hamzah
ibn Muhammad that

2 q G C G G G % d G G G!" L 2
95

I wrote to Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim (AS) asking him whether Allah had a body or an
image. Hence he (AS) wrote in reply: "Glory be to Him who has nothing whatsoever like
unto Him,"
18. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Abd Allah ibn Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi (may Allah have
mercy on him) said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather Ahmad
ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Bahr, on
the authority of Abu Ayyub al-Khazzaz, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that

G%G Y G!" I d G G G C G G O

. GI G G%G L Y G G%G Y
I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) about the claim that Allah, the Mighty and High, created
Adam (AS) in His Image; hence, he said:
That was a recently created image. Allah favored it, and chose it over all different
images. Then He attributed it to Himself like He attributed the Kabah and the Sprit to
Himself. Thus, He said: My House.1 And said: And when I breathed into him My Spirit.2
19. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Abd Allah
ibn Jafar al-Himyari said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority
al-I Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Yaqub al-Sarraj that

G Y G G G Z H G H G " G G 2 GG L
% G 3 4 G%G G G H G

2 % H Z G G G 2 k

% G 2 % G 2 m H G G G G%G G
.Z G2 Z G G G ! Z G%G

I said to Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "Some of our scholars think that Allah looks like
a human being, while others think that he is beardless and has curly hair."
Abu Abd Allah (AS) fell down in prostration, then raised his head, and said:

1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 2:125.
Translator's Note: Quran: 15:29.

96

Glory be Allah who has nothing whatsoever like unto Him! Vision cannot perceive Him,
and knowledge cannot encompass Him. He begets not, because the son resembles his
father, not is He begotten, so that He could resemble the one before Him. And none is
like Him. Exalted is He, the High, and Mighty from such attributions!
20. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Ali ibn
Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of al-Saqr ibn [Abu]
Dulaf that

G G G G G ~G" % L G G H G _
G _ G G G H H G G L d

H H G % H G"E G G G H qG

.% _ % G G H G "

I asked Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) about Divine
Unity: "Verily, I say what Hisham ibn al-Hasam said."
So he (AS) became angry and said:
What is the matter with you and Hisham? Indeed, he is not from us who thinks that
Allah, the Mighty and High, has a body. We are free from such a person in this world,
and in the Hereafter. O son of [Abu] Dulaf! Verily, the body is created and Allah is its
Creator.
The Compiler of this book says: Allah willing, I will mention the proof that bodies are created in
the chapter of this book titled "The Proof of the Creation of the World."1

1

Translator's Note: That is Chapter 42.

Chapter Seven: Innahu Shay' - The Blessed and Exalted is a Thing - 8
traditions

4 ! 23 %
1. My father (RA) that Sad ibn Abd Allah al-Ashari said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of one he mentioned, said

G%G H _ G G H _ G H G % k
G Y 4 H H H G " m E} G
..
Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) was askes it permissible to say that Allah, the Might and
High, is a Thing?"
He (AS) replied: "Yes, to the extent that it removes Him from both extremes: annulment
[tatil], and anthropomorphism [tashbih]."
2. My father (RA) that Ali ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of his father, on the authority of alAbbas ibn Amr, on the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that

G 2 G" G!" 4 G! G G G
G G G 4 % d G G
>
G _G % H G G2 G

An atheist asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) "What is He?"
He (AS) replied: He is a Thing unlike other things. If you consider the meaning of the
word "thing." He is indeed a Thing by definition [al-shay'iyyah], with the exception that
He has neither substance nor shape"
3. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar, on authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of al-Nadr ibn
Suwayd, on the authority of Yahya al-Halabi, on the authority of Ibn Muskan, on the authority
of Zurarah that

I H H E 4 G% C % G G % G%G G G ! 2 3 H G "
4 G%G G G H 2 3 *E 4 _ G

I heard Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (RA) say: "Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is free
from His Creation, and His Creation is free from Him. Whatever can be defined by the
98

word thing' is a creation other than Almighty Allah. Exalted is He who is beyond
compare."
4. Hamzah ibn Muhammad al-Alawi (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Ali ibn Atiyyah, on the authority of
Khaythamah that

E 4 G% C % G G % G%G G G ! 2 3

E 4 _ G !

Abu Jafar al-Basir (AS) said:
Verily, Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, is free from His Creation, and His Creation is
free from Him. Whatever can be defined by the word "thing" is a creation other than
Allah, the Mighty and High. Allah, the Exalted, is the Creator of all things.
5. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the authority of Abu alMaghra, who eliminated the source of report from Abu Jafar, and said:

I E 4 G% C % G G % G%G G G ! 2 3 H G " : E} G

Al-Baqir (AS) said: "Verily, Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, is free from His Creation,
and His Creation is free from Him. Whatever can be defined by the word "thing" is a
creation other than Allah, the Mighty and High."
6. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Abd al-Rahman
ibn Abu Najran that

E E Y Z H 3 L G G H G G ~H E} L d

m G % G 3
% G 3 4 % I G 2 m % G I E 4 G G%
.. E E 4 H H G H G

I asked Abu Jafar the Second (AS) about Divine Unity [Tawhid], so I sais He
presumed to be a thing?"
Consequently, he (AS) replied:
Yes. However, since He is Incomprehensible, and Unlimited, He is unlike anything you
can conceive. Nothing resembles Him. Imagination perceives Him not. And how could
99

imagination perceive Him when He is beyond all imagination? He is an Imagined Thing
which is Incomprehensible and Unlimited.
7. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki, on the authority of alHusayn ibn al-Hasan, on the authority of Bakr ibn Salih, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn
Said that

.G%G H _ G G H _ G H G % k
G Y 4 % H G" m G~H E} G
Abu Jafar the Second (Imam Muhammad al-Taqi (AS) was asked:
"Is it permissible to say that Allah is a Thing?
Hence, he (AS) answered: "Yes, to the extent that it removes Him from the two
extremes: annulment [tatil] and anthropomorphism [tashbih]."
8. Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Masrur (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Jafar ibn Buttah said: some of
our scholars, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa ib Ubayd related to me that

H L 2 % L 4 H H G G G~G G G " G G!
4 d G
G I G Z I E 4 C m Z % Y H

G H G _ G ! H L 2 L G! % Y % G" % G H G

H G G%G H q G xH q E%G G G >

H 4 %I G 2 m ! 2 3

Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) said to me: "What would you say if you were asked: Tell us,
is Allah, the Mighty and High, a Thing or is He not a thing?"
He said: I said to him (AS):
Allah, the Mighty and High, has acknowledged that He is a Thing when he said: Say:
What thing is the weightiest in testimony? Say: Allah is a witness between you and me.1
I would say: He is a Thing unlike other things, as negating that He is a Thing would
negate Him and deny Him.
He (AS) said to me: "You are correct and you are right."
(Ali) al-Rida (AS) then said to me:
People have three beliefs regarding Divine Unity [al-Tawhid]: negation,
anthropomorphism, and description without anthropomorphism. Negation, however, is
not permissible nor is anthropomorphism, because nothing resembles Allah, Blessed
and Exalted be He. The correct position is the third one, description without
anthropomorphism.

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 6:19.

100

Chapter Eight:: Ma Ja' Fi al-Ru'yah - What is Related Regarding the
Vision - 23 traditions

1. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn
Hashim said on the authority of his father, on the authority of al-Nawfali, on the authority of al-Sakuni,
on the authority of Abu Abd Allah, on the authority of his forefathers (AS) that

G E C G H H : G%GO$ G G2 G

H G!" G% E G E C G H H 3 HG(R) *

. % 3 HG(R) G *

The Prophet (SA) passed by a man who was supplication with his eyes raised to the sky. The
Messenger of Allah (SA) said to him: "Cast down your eyes for you will certainly not see Him."
He (SA) also said that:
"The Prophet (SA) passed by a man who was supplicating with his hands raised to the sky. The
Messenger of Allah (SA) said to him: Lower your hand for your will surely not reach Him.'"1
2. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said on the authority of Ali ibn Abu al-Qasim, on the
authority of Yaqub ibn Ishaq that

H % H 2 2 m
% d E H G G!" L 2
! 2 3
H G " H %H G % d Gc$ H G

I wrote to Abu Muhammad al-Askari (AS) asking him how a servant could serve a Lord he
cannot see?
Hence, he (AS) replied in writing:
"O Abu Yusuf! My Master, my Lord, and the Benefactor upon me any my forefathers, is far
above being seen."
He saialso asked whether the Messenger of Allah (SA) saw him Lord?"
1

Translator's Note: It is recommended to raise one's hands to the sky when praying or supplication.
However, this tradition is condemning not this action rather the though behind it to limit Allah to the
sky.
101

He wrote back: "Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, manifested to the Messenger what He
desired from the Light of His Magnitude."
3. Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA) said on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abd al-Jabbar, on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Asim ibn
Humayd that

G G G 2 > o

_ G n
G G Z G2 G G C G

H G I GG G (R) G

..

I consulted Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) regarding what is narrated about the vision of Allah.
Hence, he (AS) explained:
The sun is a seventieth portion of the light of the Throne [al-kursi]. The throne is a seventieth
portion of the light of the Empyrean [arsh]. The Empyrean is a seventieth portion of the light of
the Veil [hijab]. And the Veil is a seventieth portion of the Veil of Light [sitr]. Hence, if they speak
the truth, can their eyes bear the sight of the sun on a cloudless day?
4. My father (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa that Ibn Abu Nasr said on the authority of Abu al-Hasan (Ali) al-Rida (AS) that

The Messenger of Allah said:
"When I was taken to heaven during the Night Journey, Jibrail took to me to a place where he
had never stopped before. Hence, the Veil was remove for me and Allah, the Mighty and High,
showed me what He desired from the Light of His Magnitude."
5. My Father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashimsaid on the authority of his father, on the authority
of Ali ibn Mabad, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Sinan, on the authority of his father that

% 2 E 4 H E} % G G G > A

G G G m G G GG O G

102

>

H k

m
I was in the presence of Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) when a Kharijite entered his presence and
asked him: "O Abu Jafar, who do you serve?"
He (AS) replied: "Allah?"
He questioneave you seen Him?"
He (AS) answered:
Eyes cannot see him through vision, but hearts can see Him through certainty of faith. He is
neither recognized with analogy, nor perceived with the senses, and cannot be compared to
people. He is attributed through signs and recognized through indications. There is no oppression
in His Judgement. Such is Allah; there is no god but Him.
He said: "Then the man left while saying that Allah knows best where to place His Message."
6. My father said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Nasr on the authority of
Abu al-Hasan al-Mausili, on the authority of Abu abd Allah that

Z 2 L % 3 2 G H L GG G GG G G G!" G

% 3 G G G G7 % G 3 %

A rabbi came to the Commander of the Faithful (AS) and asked: "O Commander of Faithful! Do
you see your Lord when you serve Him?"
Thus, he (AS) replied: "Woe unto you! I do not serve a Lord that I cannot see."
The rabbi askeow do you see Him?"
He (AS) responded: "Woe unto you! The eyes do not perceive Him through vision but the hearts
see Him through certainty of faith."
7. Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA) said on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Ishaq that

H G%G G C G % d GGH G G G!" L 2

C H G _ Gc Gc H _ G I Y G (R) *
2 _ Gc
H G7 H Gc G c H H G 2G G
G G7 2G G q G C G7 I qG G qG 2
G 2 H G I G _ G G H
.>

103

I wrote to Abu al-Hasan the third (al-Naqi) (AS) asking about the vision of (Allah) and what
people say about it. Hence, he wrote:
Vision is only possible so long so there is no obstacle between the seer and the seen. So, when there
is an obstacle to vision, or lack of light between the seer and the seen, vision is impeded or
inaccurate. Fault necessitates when the seer equals the seen in the cause that is required between
them for vision. When it comes to vision, we can speak in anthropomorphic terms due to cause
and effect.
8. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub said:
Ahmad ibn Idris said on the authority of Ahmad Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ali ibn Sayf,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ubaydah that

H H G%G3 G C G %d _ G G G!" L 2

U
G C G I G G G H I 3 G G%_ G
G G G 3 L G (R) E G (R)G L Z G "
3 H Z
3 G G G 3
U

C G G Z G " G C G I G

3 Z G " G C G I G G GH G G 3 3 G " o

o
G G G G I G G G I GH G
G H H G I G G7 3 3

. G!" _ 3 G G" G G

I wrote to Abu al-Hasan (Ali) al-Rida (AS) asking him about the vision of Allah and what that
Sunnis and the Shiites narrate regarding the subject. I asked him to explain the subject in detail
to me. Hence, he (AS) wrote in his own handwriting:
All agree unanimously that Allah's recognition is necessary. So, if it is possible to see Allah, the
Mighty and High, with the eyes, then recognition has taken place. And this recognition could take
place with or without faith. If recognition via vision is faith, then it is not faith, because faith is the
opposite of visual recognition. If recognition via vision is faith, then there would be no people of
faith in the world since nobody has seen Allah, Exalted is His Remembrance. If faith is based on
visual recognition, then it might vanish as a result of death and resurrection. This is sufficient
proof that Allah, noble be His Remembrance, cannot be seen by the eye....
9. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub al-Kulayni
said on the authority of Ahmad ibn Idris, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abd al-Jabbar, on the
authority of Safwan ibn Yahya that

104

G % d G% G ! G d G G7 % d
_ G G % G _ H G d

H H G G _ 2 G G C E H G

G % G 3 G G _ G G H G!"
% H G G G G % H G Z G G G!" G1/4

% G 3 m G G dG G G!"

% G 3 G H >
G 2 G Z G G%G L G G % m H

# Z $ m % H G(R) H #$

m C G G G H G " G

G $ G G H > E H

H H >

H G GL G G%G L % 3 G (R) Z G G%G

% G 3 G G%G % H G%

Abu Qurrah, the traditionist, asked me to take him to Abu al-Hasan (Ali) al-Rida (AS);
therefore, I asked for his permission to visit him, and he granted it to me. So, he (Abu Qurrah)
went to him, and asked him about the laws regarding the permissible and the forbidden, until he
reached the subject of Divine Unity.
Hence, Abu Qurrah sait has been transmitted to us that Allah, the Mighty and High, divided
vision and speech between two prophets; allocating speech to Musa (AS) and allocating vision for
Muhammad (SA)."
Consequently, Abu al-Hasan (AS) replied:
Who is it that brought the revelation from Allah, the Mighty and High, to both jinn and
humankind? Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends (all) vision.1 And they do not

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 6:103.
105

comprehend Him in knowledge.1 Nothing whatsoever is like unto Him.2 Was it not Muhammad
(SA)?
He said: "Of course?"

If that is the case, then how could he come to all of creation, saying that he was sent by Allah, call
them by His Command, that vision comprehend Him not, and He comprehend all vision. And
they do not comprehend Him in Knowledge. Nothing whatsoever is like unto Him, and then claim
that "I have seen Him with my own eyes. I comprehend Him, and He has a human form." Are
people not ashamed of saying such things? The unbelievers can use this against us: claiming that
Allah revealed one thing and the Prophet contradicted it!
Abu Qurrah says: "Then He says: And certainly he saw Him in another descent.3
Hence, Abu al-Hasan (AS) replied:
Verily, the verse after this verse stipulates what he saw, as He says, The heart was not untrue in
(making him see) what he saw.4 He is saying that the heart of Muhammad (SA) was not untrue in
what his eyes saw. Then He informs of what he saw and says: Certainly he saw of the greatest
signs of his Lord.5 Thus, the signs of Allah, the Mighty and High, are other than Allah. As He has
said: And they do not comprehend Him in knowledge. So, if the eyes saw Him, then they
comprehended Him in knowledge, and recognition had taken place.
Abu Qurrah enquired: "Do you claim that the prophetic traditions are false?"
Abu al-Hasan (AS) responded: "Any prophetic traditions which contradict the Quran are false.
According to the consensus of all Muslims, He cannot be comprehended in knowledge, vision
comprehends Him not, and nothing whatsoever is like unto Him."
10. My father (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ibn Abu Najran, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Sinan that

G%G G!" 3 G G "
% G 3 H H G G2 G

G 2 G G m G%G G *
G *
G m _ G GO
_ G G m G G " H G" G G m I aG

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of the Mighty and High: Vision
comprehends Him not, and He comprehends (all) vision.
He explained:
It is the comprehension of the imagination. Do you not see His Word: Verily, there have come to
you clear proofs from your Lord. This does not mean the vision of eyes; whoever will therefore

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 20:110.
Translator's Note: Quran: 42:11.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 53:13.
4
Translator's Note: Quran: 53:11
5
Translator's Note: Quran: 53:18.
2

106

see, it is for his own soul. It does not mean seeing with the eye; and whoever will be blind, it shall
be against himself.1
This does not mean blindness of the eyes. It certainly means comprehension of the imagination,
like it is said: so and so has the vision of poetry, so and so has the vision of jurisprudence, so and
so has the vision of coins, and so and so has the vision of clothes. Allah is far above visual
perception.
11. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar
said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad said on the authority of Abu Hashim al-Jafari, on the authority of Abu al-

H H G G % d : _ G G

G % G 3 I G G G
G H G " G L G I
.

Hasan (Ali) al-Rida (AS) that
I asked him whether it is possible to describe Allah, the Mighty and High.
Hence, he replied: "Do you not read the Quran?"
I responded: "What do you mean?"
He said: "Do you not read the Word of the Mighty and High: Vision comprehends Him not, and
He comprehends (all) vision.2
I answered: "So?"
He (AS) asked: "Then do you know what vision means?"
I replied: "Sure"
He (AS) said: "What is t?"
I said: "The vision of the eyes."
Hence, he (AS) explained: "Verily, the imagination of the mind is greater than the vision of the
eyes. Thus, imagination comprehends Him not, and He comprehends all imagination."
12. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah
al-Kufi said on the authority of who he mentioned, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the
authority of Dawud ibn al-Qasim on the authority of Abu Hashim al-Jafari that

1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 6:104.
Translator's Note: Quran: 6:103.
107

_ G G G 3 L G G
d *
G 2 G I G 3 I 3 GH 2 G I

% G 3

I asked Abu Jafar ibn al-Rida (AS) about: Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends
(all) vision.
Hence, he replied:
O Abu Hashim! The imagination of mind is more precise than the vision of the eyes. You may
imagine Sind, India, the towns which you have not visited, and which you have not seen with your
eyes. Thus, if imagination cannot comprehend Him, how can the eyes?"
13. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah
al-Kufi said on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki, on the authority al-Husayn ibn alHasan, on the authority of Bakr ibn Salih, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of
Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Khazzaz and Muhammad ibn al-Husayn both said

H G G7 % H Z H H G % _ G G

G 3/4

m a
H G G G H qG E G G H G " L E A

H Ga2

2
2 H Z G k
G H G " G G G " G G

G " L H GGH G G G 3 E _G L G G I 2_ Y G%G L
G! G G H H E H $ H H E 4 G H 3

G%_ G G!" G G H G " H G!H G 2 m
E A

G7 G L G L G L G G G G7
H G " % G2 m H qG G G G E G7 % G%G2 G G%_ G!" G "

G%G G I H G % G H H % G H H % G A
H A

108

We entered into the presence of Abu al-Hasan (Ali) al-Rida (AS). We related to him what was
transmitted regarding Muhammad (SA); namely, that he saw His Lord in the form of a vigorous
young man of thirty years of age, whose feet wee covered in greenery. I also explained to him that
that Hisham ibn Salim, Sahib al-Taqi and al-Maythami say that Allah's belly is hollow and the
rest (of His body) is solid.
Hence, he (AS) fell in prostration and then said:
May You be Glorified! They have not recognized You, nor have they testified to Your Unity. As a
result, they have described You as such. May You be glorified! Had they recognized You, they
would have only described You by means of the attributes with which You have described
yourself. May You be glorified! They have certainly wronged themselves by describing You with
what is not worthy of You. O my God, I only describe You with the attributes with which You
have described yourself, and I do not compare You with Your Creation. You are worthy of all
good. Do not count me among the oppressors.
Then he (AS) turned his face to us and said: "Whatever you have imagined, imagine Allah as
other than that." He (AS) then added:
We, the Household of Muhammad (SA), are the middle way [al-Namat al-Awsat] which the
exaggerator [ghali] cannot comprehend, and the neglectful follower does not reach. O
Muhammad! Verily, when the Messenger of Allah (SA) looked at the grandeur of His Lord, he,
the Messenger, was in a form of a vigorous young man of thirty years of age. O Muhammad! MY
Lord is far above possessing the attributes of the created.
He says, I asked him (AS): `May I be your ransom! Whose feet were covered in green?"
He (AS) replied:
That refers to Muhammad (SA). When looked at his Lord by means of his heat, Allah covered
him in the Light of His Veil until it was apparent to him what was behind the veil. Verily, the
Light of Allah is green, red, and white, as well as other colors. O Muhammad, we only accept
what agrees with the Book (Quran), and the Sunnah (traditions of the Prophet).
14. Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Isam al-Kulayni (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub al-Kulayni
said on the authority of Ali ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad and others, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Sulayman, on the authority of Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Jafari, on the authority
of Abd Allah ibn Sinan, that

2 G%G G 2G G m G G

H H G H E G % G

E 4 _ G G E _ G7 G ! 2 3 G G H G L Z
.G2
% G 3

G H G C G H G " % G "
109

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Verily, Allah is the Most Great, and the Lofty [al-rafi]. Worshippers cannot describe Him, nor
can they reach the core of His Magnificence. Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends
(all) vision; and He is the Subtle, the All-Aware.
He cannot be described in terms of how,' where' and when'. And how can I describe him by
means of how' when it is He who created the condition for the question how;' hence, I
recognized the condition by the fact that He created the how.' And how can I describe Him in
terms of where' when it was He was created space; hence, I recognized space by the fact that he
created the where.' And how can I describe him in terms of when' when it was he who created
time; hence, I recognized time by the fact that He created time.
Thus, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is present in every place, and is absent from everything.
Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends all vision. There is no god but He: the Most
High, the Great. And He is the Knower of subtleties, the Aware.
15. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the
authority of the Ibn Abu Najran, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sinan, on the authority of Ibrahim
and al-Fadl sons fo Muhammad al-Ashariyyayn, on the authority of Ubayd ibn Zurarah, on the
authority of his father that

G L GH G L G G G 2 GG L : G%G
E C G 2 H 2C G 3 H % H 3 G " G % G "
.
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "May I be your ransom! What use to make the Messenger
of Allah (SA) swoon when he received the revelation?"
He (AS) answered: "That happened when there was nothing separating him from Allah. That
happened when Allah manifested Himself to him."
He says that he (AS) then added: "Such is Prophethood, O Zurarah! Accept it with humility."
16. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Ibrahim ibn Hashim said on the
authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Murazim, that

. G%G2 G G m H H %H G m % G G G2 G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The Messenger of Allah saw his Lord, the Mighty and High,
by means of his heart."
The confirmation of this is found in the following tradition.
17. What Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl that

110

m H H
L G $ G%G2 G Y H H % H G G L d

.G G $ G *
G 2 G

I asked Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim (AS): "Did the Messenger of Allah (SA) see his Lord, the Mighty
and High?"
Hence, he (AS) replied: "Yes, he saw Him by means of his heart. Have you not heard Allah, the
Might and High that the heart was not untrue in (making him see) what he saw.1 That is to say, he
did not see Him with his eyes, but he saw Him with the heart."
18. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said on the authority of al-Qasim ibn Muhammad alIsfahani, on the authority of Sulayman ibn Dawud al-Minqari, on the authority of Hafs ibn Ghiyath or
someone else that

G $ G H H G G G G2 L d

H E GOGC G % G 2
.

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: Certainly,
he saw of the greatest signs of his Lord.2
He (AS) repliee saw Jibrail. His thighs were covered in pearls like dew drops on plants. He
had six hundred wings. He filled the space between the sky and the Earth."
19. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Harun al-Sufi
said: Ubad Allah ibn Musa al-Rawyani said: Abd al-Azim ibn Abd Allah ibn Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn
Zayd ibn al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) said on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Abu Mahmud that

.I_ G 3 G G m a

Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) explained that the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High, (Some) faces
on that day shall be bright, looking to their Lord3 mean that "They will be illuminated, anxiously
awaiting the reward from their Lord."
20. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah
al-Kufi said: Musa ibn Imran al-NakhaI said on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Yazid al-Nawfali, on
the authority Ali ibn Abu Hamzah, on the authority of Abu Basir that

1

Translator's Note: Quran 53:11.
Translator's Note: Quran 53:18.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 75: 22-3.
2

111

G H H G G G~G % L : G G2 G
GG H G " H Z L H _ G L I G L G G G
I G _ d G L G % L E G G G7 3 L G G G 2

G n
d G%G L H G " HG(R)

% G G H H H % G G n
.

I 2_ % G m H ! G G G

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) to: "Enlighten me about Allah, the Mighty and High. Will
the Believers see Him on the Day of Judgment?"
He (AS) responded: "Yes, In fact, they have even seen Him before the Day of Judgment."
So I enquired: "When?"
He answered: "When He said to them: Am I not your Lord? They said: Yes!"1
Then he (AS) was quiet for a while and then spoke: "Verily, the Believers see Him in this world
before the Day of Judgement. Do you not see Him at this moment?"
Abu Basir says I said to him: "May I be your ransom! Can I narrate this on your authority?"
He (AS) replied:
No, If you relate this, the ignorant denier will argue with you regarding its meaning. He will
assume that this is anthropomorphism, and will disbelieve. The vision of the heart is not the same
as the vision of the eyes. Exalted is Allah from what the anthropomorphists [mushabbahum] and
apostates [mulhidum] attribute to Him!
21. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamadani (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said on the authority of his
father Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Abd al-Salam ibn Salih al-Hirawi that

Z H % H G H ! 2 3
H G " GL H G IGG G I H

C G7 %3 G % % % % G G O _GH G G%G G G

G H H G " H G G H % 3 G
G m2 HG" G m2

H _ G H G G G7 G~ C G H G IG

>

G G % L ! 2 3 G G H G!"

GL H G G% G!" H H G " % G " H G H G
1

Translator's Note: Quran: 7:172.
112

H G%G G G!" G G!" % H G IG
G H % % G G % G }

G G G G!" H % I H G " G E 4 C H _ % 2 .E I C
G C G H G G GG G G

2 3
H G " GL H G Gm G~ G H G " G G G~ G G
G H G G~G d G G % L

!

G H H H G H G " Y G GH

I G H G G G G 3 H I H G"

H H I G G7 H E 4 G G H H G H H n

G H C G H E $ E G I
.
G I G _ GH H I G G H

H G G7 Z G H % d I G 2 G G H G d

GH G G O G!" L H H G Y G " G G G L G L

. G G G O L G

I asked Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS): "O son of the Messenger of Allah! What do you say about the
tradition of the Ahl al-Hadith1 that the Believers shall visit their Lord in Paradise from their own
places?"
Hence, he (AS) replied:
O Abu al-Salt! Verily, Allah, the Blessed and exalted, favored his Prophet Muhammad (SA) over
all of His Creation. He favored him above all the Prophets and the angels. He made obedience to
the Prophet obedience to Allah. He made following the Prophet following Allah. He made visiting
the Prophet in this world and the Hereafter like visiting him.2
Thus, He, the Mighty and High, has said: Whoever obeys the Messenger, he indeed obeys Allah.3
And has said: Surely those who swear allegiance to you do but swear allegiance to Allah; the hand
of Allah is above their hands.1
1

Translator's Note: It is a Sunni sect.
Editor's Note: Visiting the Prophets and the Imams while they are alive, after they are dead, and in the
Hereafter, is one of the most rewarding of actions. The Prophet, the Companions, and the Imams, all
visited graves, paid respect to the dead, and prayed for them. They were the epitome of piety.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 4:80.
113
2

And the Prophet (SA) said: Whoever visits me in my life or after my death, has indeed visited
Allah.' The place of the Prophet (SA) in Paradise is the most elevated place. Thus, whoever visits
him in his place in Paradise from his own place, has certainly visited Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted.
I then asked him: "O son of the Messenger of Allah, then what is the meaning of the report which
they have transmitted that the reward of saying there is no god but Allah' is looking at the face of
Allah?"
So he (AS) responded:
O Abu al-Salt! Whoever claims that Allah ha a face like a human face has indeed disbelieved. The
Face of Allah is, in fact, His Prophets, Messengers and Proof, may the blessings of Allah be upon
them. They are the ones through whom Allah is noticed, through whom people turn to His
Religion, and through whom Allah is witnessed.
Hence, Allah, the Mighty and High, says: Everyone on it must pass away. And there will endure
forever the Face of your Lord, the Lord of glory and honor.2 And He, the Mighty and High, says:
Everything is perishable but His Face.3 Therefore, looking at Prophets of Allah, His Messengers
and Proofs (AS) in their places is a great reward for the Believers on the Day of Judgment.
Hence, the Prophet (SA) has said: "Whoever hates my Household and Progeny, will not see me,
and I will not see him on the Day of Judgment." And he (AS) said: "Verily, there is among you
who will not see me after they have parted from me"
O Abu al-Salt! Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is not limited to place. Vision and
imagination do not comprehend Him.
I then enquired from him: "O son of the Messenger of Allah! Inform me about Paradise and Hell.
Are they already created?"
He (AS) replieertainly! And the Messenger of Allah (SA) surely entered Paradise and saw
Hell, when he ascended to Heaven."
I asked him: "There are people who say: they are both decreed, but not created yet."
So he (AS) answered:
Such people are not from us, and we are not from them. Whosoever denies the creation of
Paradise and Hell belies the Prophet (SA) and belies us. Such people do not follow our authority,
and will remain in hell-fire. Allah, the Mighty and High, says: This is the hell which the guilty
called a lie. Round about shall they go between it and hot, boiling water.4
And the Prophet (SA) said:
When I ascended to Heaven, Jibrail took me by the hand, and brought me to Paradise. He gave
me some dates from Paradise, and I ate them, producing semen in my loins. When I came down to
Earth and had contact with Khadijah (AS), she became pregnant with Fatimah (AS). Thus,
Fatimah is a human houri [hawra'insiyyah]. Whenever I long for the perfume of Paradise, I smell
the scent of my daughter Fatimah (AS).
22. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sadabadi said on he
authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi, on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn Khalid,
on the authority of Ahmad ibn al-Nadr, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Marwan, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn al-Sa'ib, on the authority of Abu al-Salih that

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 48:10.
Translator's Note: Quran: 55:26-7.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 28:88.
4
Translator's Note: Quran: 55:43-4.
2

114

G G" L 2 3 2 m GG H G" L 2 3 2
. 3 H C d
Abd Allah ibn Abbas was asked to interpret the Word of the Mighty and High: And when Musa
came at Our appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he said: My Lord! Show me (Thyself), so
that I may look upon Thee. He said: You cannot (bear to) see Me but look at the mountain, if it
remains firm in its place, then will you see Me; but when his Lord manifested to the mountain He
made it crumble and Musa fell down in a swoon; then when he recovered, the said: Glory be to
Thee, I turn to Thee, and I am the first of the Believers.1
He said: Musa (AS) sailory be to You, I turn to You from asking You to se You, and I am
the first of the Believes who bears witness that you cannot be seen."
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn, the Compiler of this book (RA) says: Verily, Musa (AS) knew that
it is not possible to see Allah, the Mighty and High. He surely asked Allah, the Mighty and High, to
show Himself to him, so that he may look upon Him. Because his people insisted that he do so.
Therefore, Musa (AS) asked the question to His Lord without taking permission from Him. He (AS)
said: My Lord! Show me Yourself, so that I may look upon You. God replied: You cannot see Me but
look at the mountain, if it remains firm in its place, then you will see Me. The meaning of this is that
You will never se Me because the mountain never moves in any state. This is like the Word of Allah,
the Mighty and High: They shall not enter the garden until the camel passes through the eye of the
needle.2
The meaning of this is that they will never enter the garden like the camel will never pass through the
eye of the needle, but when his Lord manifested Himself to the mountain i.e. manifested a sign from His
Signs. That sign was a light from the lights which He had created; He cast down His Might on that
mountain. He made it crumble and Musa fell down in a swoon from fear of the earthquake which was
shaking that mountain with its power. Then, when he recovered, he sailory be to You, I turn to
You i.e. I return to my recognition of You, turning from my people and their request to see You." This
repentance was not the result of a sin, since prophets do not commit major or minor sins.
The permission before the question was not obligatory upon him; in fact, it was a form of politeness. He
always used to d this prior to asking a question. According to one group, he had taken permission before
asking that vision was not applicable to Allah, the Mighty and High. Regarding his statement: And I am
the first of the Believers, Moses is saying that I am the first of the Believers from the group that were
with him. They had asked him to take permission from his Lord to show Himself, so that he may look
upon Him.
The traditions that have transmitted regarding this subject, and which our elders (RA) have mentioned
in their writings, are authentic as far as I am concerned. However, I refrained from transmitting them in
this chapter fearing that some ignorant people may read them and interpret them literally, rejecting
them, and disbelieving in Allah, the Mighty and High, out of ignorance.
The traditions that Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa has mentioned in his Nawadir and those which
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya has mentioned in his Jami regarding the vision of Allah are
authentic. Only the ignorant and the unbelievers can reject them. Their wording is the wording of the
Quran. These reports negate anthropomorphism [tashbih] and annulment [tatil] as a means of proving
Divine Unity. Our Imams, may the blessings of Allah be upon them, have certainly ordered us not to
address people beyond the capacity of their intellect.

1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 7:143.
Translator's Note: Quran: 7:40.
115

In these reports, the vision of Allah means the knowledge of Allah. In other words, this world is a place
of doubt, uncertainty, and danger. Thus, when the Day of Judgment comes, the Signs of Allah and His
Command will unveil for His servants and deliver both reward and punishment. Doubt will be
eliminated, and all will attest to the reality and Omnipotence of Allah, the Mighty and High. The
confirmation of this is in the Book of Allah, Mighty and High: Certainly you were heedless of it, but
now We have removed from you your veil, so your sight today is sharp.1
So, the meaning of what is narrated in the tradition that He, the Mighty and High, will be seen is that He
will be known with understanding and surety like His Word, the Mighty and High: Have you not seen
your Lord, how He extends the shade?2 And His Word: Did you not see him (Namrud) who disputed
with Ibrahim about his Lord,3 and Hid Word: Did you not see those who went forth from their homes, in
thousands, fearing death,4 and His Word: Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with the fellows of
the elephants?5
And other examples of this include that vision refers to the vision of the heart, and not the vision of the
eyes. As for the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: but when his Lord manifested to the mountain, it
means that He, the Mighty and High, made a sign appear as a Sign of the Signs of the hereafter which
will make mountains into a mirage, and which will uproot the mountains and scatter them away as dust.
The mountain crumbled and turned into dust, because it would not bear that sign. It is said: The light of
the throne manifested itself upon the mountain.
23. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said on the authority of al-Qasim ibn Muhammad alIsfahani, on the authority of Sulayman ibn Dawud al-Minqari, on the authority of Hafs ibn Ghiyath alNakhaI al-Qadi that

2 b % G 2 G % C H 3 H H H G G G G 2 L d

. G
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: But when
his Lord manifested His Glory to the mountain He made it crumble.6
He (AS) explained: "The Mountain slipped into the ocean, and is still grieving to this date."
24. And the confirmation of what I have mentioned is what said Tamim ibn Abd Allah al-Qarashi (RA)
that My father related to me on the authority of Hamdan ibn Sulayman al-Naysaburi, on the authority of
Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm that

C G _ G G d G > A

G >

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 50:22.
Translator's Note: Quran: 25:45.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 2:258.
4
Translator's Note: Quran: 2:243.
5
Translator's Note: Quran: 105:1.
6
Translator's Note: Quran: 7:143.
2

116

G~ 3 G" G~G _ % C % H G 3GG H H

G ! H m G

Z G % H H H % H H % H G G G ! H G G

L G % ^ Y H G % H % H H H

2 I G H Z G2 I G E G G OG 2

G GG Z G2 I G H E OG 2
G G 2 G G7 I d G G!" G IG k

% ^ G o

G ! % H % ^ I G m % _ ! 2 3

H I G Z G2 % H G

H Z I H G ^ G G H H dG G G G G G G

3 G IG G I 3 d Z G G I H H G

L H G Z G 3 HG I G IG L 2 HG" G I G" L G " G O

L 3 G

m H G" % H G G G H G "G

G 3

% d H G m G%G3 G

% H I d G IG G L G O

H G G (R) G 2 G!" GG G~ 3 G" G~G _

L 2 3 2
H b % G%G3$ G E G G 2 G % C H 3 H G~ 3
d 3 HdG I G GG H GO G I G G G G!" L m G"

117

I was present in the gathering of al-Mamun and al-Rida Ali ibn Musa (AS) was with him; hence,
al-Mamun asked him: "O son of the Messenger of Allah! Do you not claim that the prophets (SA)
are infallible?"
He (AS) replied: "Of course."
Hence, he asked him about the verses of the Quran. Among the questions he asked was:
Then, what is the meaning of the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: And when Musa came at
Our appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he said: My Lord! Show me (Thyself), so that I
may look upon Thee. He said: You cannot (bear to) see Me?"1 How is it possible that Musa son of
Imran (AS), to whom Allah ha spoken, did not know that Allah, Exalted be His Remembrance,
cannot be seen, thus leading him to ask that question?
So al-Rida (AS) answered:
Verily, Musa ibn Imran (AS), to whom Allah has spoken, knew that Allah is far above being seen
by human eyes. However, when Allah, the Mighty and High spoke to him, He made him draw
nigh, Musa (AS) returned to his people and informed them that Allah, the Mighty and High,
spoke to him and made him draw nigh. Therefore, the people responded: "We will not believe in
you until we hear His Speech like you head it."
The people were seven hundred thousand men. He chose seventy thousand from them. Then, from
these, he chose seven thousand. For these, he chose seven hundred. And, finally, from these seven
hundred, he chose seventy men for the appointment of his Lord.
He then went out to Mount Sinai, and stood them on the mountain slope. Musa (AS) climbed the
Sinai, and asked Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, to speak to him, and to make them hear His
Speech. Thus, Allah, Exalted be His Remembrance, spoke to him, and they heard His Speech
from above, below, right, left, behind and in front, because Allah, the Mighty and High, created it
in the tree, then directed the sound to them from the tree to them until they could hear it from all
sides. Then they said: "We will not believe that this is the speech of Allah until we see Allah
manifestly."
When they said these insolent words, they were all puffed up with pride. As a result, Allah, the
Mighty and high, seized them for their oppression and struck them with a thunderbolt, killing
them all. Musa (AS) then said: "O Lord! What shall I say to the Israelites when I return to them
and they say to me: You took them with you and killed them, because you were not truthful in
your claim that Allah drew night to you." Thus, Allah raised them to life, and sent them with him.
They then saif you had asked Allah to show Himself to you s that you could see Him, He
would certainly have answered you. Then, you could have described Him for us so that we could
recognize Him they way He deserves to be recognized."
Musa (AS) said: "O people! Verily, Allah cannot be seen by human eyes and He is not subject to
shape. He can only be recognized by His Signs and can only known through His Attributes." They
said: "We will not believe in you until you ask Him." Hence, Musa (AS) said: "O Lord! You
certainly heard the words of the Israelites, and You are the Most Knowledgeable of their interest.
So Allah, Exalted be His Glory, revealed to him: "O Musa! Ask Me what they have asked you for
I will not resent you for their ignorance."
At this point Musa (AS) said:
My Lord! Show me (Thyself), so that I may look upon Thee. He said: You cannot see Me but look
at the mountain, if it remains firm in its place (while it is shaking), then will you see Me; but when
his Lord manifested to the mountain (a sign from His Signs) He made it crumble and Musa fell
down in a swoon; then when he recovered, he said: Glory be to Thee, I turn to Thee (I am turning
back to my recognition of You from the ignorance of my people), and I am the first of the
Believers to profess that You cannot be seen.2
Al-Mamun expressed: "For Allah's sake continue, O Abu al-Hasan."

1
2

Translator's Note: Quran 7:143.
Translator's Note: Quran 7:143.
118

The Compiler of this book says: The tradition is detailed; we have extracted from it the required
passage. I have transmitted all of it in the book Uyun Akhbar al-Rida (AS). If I had transmitted all the
traditions which are narrated regarding the vision, surely the book would become lengthy with their
mentioning, their explanation and proving their authenticity.
Whoever Allah, Exalted be His Remembrance, grants success with right guidance, believe in all that is
transmitted with the authentic chain of narrations from the Imam (AS), submits to them (AS) and
consults their teachings when he is in doubt. This is because their words are the Words of Allah and
their orders are the Orders of Allah. They are the closest in creation to Allah, the Mighty and High, and
those with the greatest knowledge of Allah, may the blessings of Allah be upon them all.

119

Chapter Nine: Al-Qudrah Omnipotence - 17 traditions

1. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said; Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Ishaq al-Khaffaf that some of our scholars related that

G G Y G % G G H G ~ m

C _ m _ G G7 I H

G 2 G~3 G G % G d G% d G G2 G G!" G q G

L G! d H G G2 % G H G " IG H E d G C G ~ m

a

G H I C C G G G 2 L
Z Z 3 G G~G G I G C G

3 G H G G H H G " G G 2 % Z I Z 2 G Z 3 Z Z
G% 2H G% G qH _

% k
I Z G L G L G " G % G G Z G G Z _ G

H G 2 % H G G 2 G Z G H G d G~ m

G 2 % G2 GH E H }
% H % G d G% d G G 2

G G 3

G G d m G 2 C % % 2 % L G H m

G " G G G 2 % aG G G d G2 GH }

G G 2 HG" % G G G G 2 I G q G %
G G G G L 3 G G %
2

120

H G G 3 2G O H GH G2G O H G GH G G 3 G O 2 H 2G O GH G O

H G G G G G " G G I G k
o

% G " I H Z G 1/2
G G H G G G G 3 U G L G

L H G qG O3 G%G G G H G " H % 2 Z H H % (c)

Abd Allah al-Daysani come to Hisham ibn al-Hakam and asked him: "Do you have a Lord?"
Hence, he replied: "Of course."
"Is He Omnipotent [qadir]?" He enquired.
He answered: "Yes, He is Omnipotent, and He is the Subduer."
He asked: "Does He have the power to place the whole world in an egg, without making the egg
bigger or the world smaller?"
So Hisham respondean you give me some time?"
Therefore, he saishall give you some time." Then he left from his presence.
Hisham went riding to Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) and asked for his permission to enter;
hence, he permitted him.
He then explained, "O son of the Messenger of Allah (SA)! Abd Allah al-Daysani came to me
with a question that no one can resolve except Allah and you."
Thus, Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said to him, "What is it that he asked you?"
So he replied, "He said to me so and so."
Thus, Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) explained, "O Hisham! How many sense do you have?"
"Five." Hisham answered.
So the Imam (AS) asked, "Which is the smallest of the senses?"
He said: "The pupil (of the eye)."
"What is the size of the pupil?" The Imam (AS) enquired.
Hisham responded, "It is the size of a grain of lentil or even smaller than that."
Thus, the Imam (AS) said: "O Hisham! Look ahead and above you, and inform me of what you
see."
He replied, "I see the sky, the Earth, houses, palaces, dust, mountains and rivers."
Then, Abu Abd Allah (AS) said: "Verily, the One who has the power to place what you see in a
grain of lentil or seen smaller than that has the power to place the whole world in an egg, without
making the world smaller or making the egg bigger."
Hisham threw himself down to the Imam's feet and kissed his hands, head and feet, and then said:
"This is sufficient for me, O son of the Messenger of Allah." Then he returned to his house.
The following day al-Daysani came to him and said; "O Hisham, I have come to you, greeted you,
and have not come demanding an answer."
Hisham replied, "Whether or not you came for an answer, I have it."
Hence, al-Daysani left is present. He was informed that Hisham went to the presence of Abu Abd
Allah (AS) and he has taught him the answer. Abd Allah al-Daysani left, and reached the door of
Abu Abd Allah (AS). He asked for his permission to enter and the Imam permitted him. When
he sat down, he said to the Imam (AS), "O Jafar son of Muhammad! Guide me to my Lord."
Thus, Abu Abd Allah (AS) asked, "What is your name?"
So he walked out on the Imam (AS) and did not inform him of is name. Hence, he friends asked
him, "Why did you not tell him your name?"
121

He replied, "If I had told that my name is Abd Allah, he would have said: Who is that you are
the servant of?"
They said to him "Return to him and tell him to guide you to your Lord without asking you your
name."
Therefore, he returned to him and said: "O Jafar! Guide me to my Lord, and do not ask me
about my name."
Thus, Abu Abd Allah (AS) said to him, "Sit down." He had a young boy, who had an egg in his
hand and was playing with it. So Abu Abd Allah (AS) said: "Young lad, bring me the egg." So he
brought it to him. Abu Abd Allah (AS) further said:
O Daysani, this is a concealed stronghold. It has a solid cover, and inside the solid cover there is
soft layer. Inside the soft layer there is the egg-yolk and the albumin. Neither does the egg-yolk
mix with the albumin not does the albumin mix the egg-yolk. Each remains in its state. No
informer comes out of it to inform of its usefulness nor has a defect informed of its decay. No one
knows whether it will make a male or a female. Colors lie that of the peacocks burst out of it. Do
you not think that it is the product of Planner [mudabbir]?
He put his head down for a long time, then saibear witness that there is no god but Allah,
Alone. He has no associates, and Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger, and you are an Imam
and a Proof from Allah for His Creation. I repent for the misguidance in which I was in."
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar
said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid said, on the authority of some of our scholars that

2 3 3 > G G " H G G2 G E G _ G H :

I G G G Y G G IG G

G G 2 Z G 3$ 3H

.

Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) was passing by a grave from the graves of his Household, so he placed
his hand on the grave and said:
O my God! Your Omnipotence is apparent. However, since You are Shapeless, people are
ignorant of You. They try to measure You in a vain efforts to recognize You. However, any
measurement of You is other than you. O my Lord! I disassociate myself from those who compare
You with Your creation. Nothing is similar to You. My Lord! They cannot comprehend You. If
they wanted to recognize You, Your blessings are the best proof for You.
O my God! It is sufficient for them to ponder on Your Creation, and to refrain from exploring
Your Nature. However, they consider You are your Creation as one and the same. That is why
they fail to truly recognize You and consider Your Signs as their Lord and have described you as
such. My Lord! You are far above the descriptions of the anthropomorphist.
3. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab said,
on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Nasr that

122

G IG G (R) G O G d Y
G % G G G!"G I H G G

E 4 _

. G H I Y G%G3 G

A group of people came from across the river to see Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) and said: "We
have come to ask you three questions. If you can answer all the three question, we will know that
you are the Most Learned."
The Imam (AS) said: "Ask."
They saiet us know about Allah: Where is He? How is He? And what does He rely upon?"
Hence, he (AS) replied, "Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, created the quality of how;'
therefore how' does not apply to Hi. He has created space; thus, He is not in need of space. And
He relies upon His Omnipotence."
They said: We testify that you are Most Learned One."
The Compiler of this book (RA) says: The meaning of his statement He relies upon His
Omnipotence' is that He relies on His Being, because Omnipotence is one of the Essential
Attributes of Allah, the Might and High.
4. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said, on the authority of his paternal uncle Muhammad ibn Abu
al-Qasim, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ali al-Kufi, on the authority of Abd al-Rahman, ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Hashim, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhsin al-Maythami that

d 3 G H G { G G G7 G H G 2 G L

G m G G G" G H G Y G % q G I G

2 H d

G H % % G G%G L G2G G G G G G G L ~G

m
G L H 3 H L H 3 G " H G H L G H H HG" G G "

G G % G E G G!" G m E G!" G G 3 G H

G " E 2 G G H G "

% I Z G G " H Z G

m G m G G "
123

E 4 H Y E 4 H % L I G

m

3 I I H Z IG" G

G H G%G 3 2G G!" G%G G I

G 3 H G G G 3 Y G Y G7 % 3 q

G 2 G2
G G H G G H G G 3H
G" G OG" _2 G H2 G

G G G 3 I o
G o
3 I G

G G7 G 1/2

.% G G I %H L H I GH OG Y G7 G I GH % 3 H C m

I was in the presence of Abu Mansur al-Mutatabbib when he said: One of my companions related
to me that:
I was sitting in the Sacred Mosque of Mecca with Ibn Abu al-Awja' and Abd Allah ibn alMuqaffa when Ibn al-Muqaffaasked pointing at the place of circumambulation [Tawaf], "Do
you see these created beings?". He said: "There is not a single human being among them, except
the Shaykh who is sitting over there (meaning Jafar ibn Muhammad). The rest are nothing but
riffraff and beasts."
So Ibn Abu al-Awja' answered him, "How is it that you apply the term (human being) to this
shaykh and no to the others?"
"Because I have seen in him what I do not see in them," he replied.
Thus, Ibn Abu al-Awja' enquired, "I must confirm for myself what you have said regarding
him."
Then, Ibn al-Muqaffa replied to him, "Do not even go there! For, verily, I fear that you may
destroy what you already have!"
He said: "This is not your view. In fact, you fear that I will regard your view as weak once I see
the one whom you have praised."
Ibn al-Muqaffa then replied, "If you suspect this then go to him, to have y our doubts removed.
Do not be stubborn. It will protect you from hesitation. Inform him of what may benefit or harm
you."
The reporter says that Ibn Abu al-Awja' got up and Ibn al-Muqaffa and I remained. Then he
returned to us and said: "O Ibn al-Muqaffa! He is not a human being, even though he may be a
mystic [ruhani] in this world. If he desires, he appears as a body. If he desires, he conceals himself
as a spirit. This is what he is."
He asked, "How is that?"
124

He replied, "I sat near him. When there was no one there other than me, he (AS) said to me, "If
things are as people claim, and if they believed in what they professed, (referring to the people
circumambulating the Kabah), then they are safe, and you are destroyed. However, if the matter
is the way you all say it, and it certainly is not, then you are both equal."
I asked him, "May Allah have mercy on you! What is it that we say and what is it that they say?
My statement and their statement is nothing but the same."
He (AS) responded, "How can your statement and their statement be one when they say that they
have a return, reward, and punishment. They affirm that the sky has a Lord and it is inhabited
while you claim that the sky is wasteland and there is no one there."
Ibn Abu al-Awja' says that I availed the opportunity from him and asked him,
What ha stopped Him, if the matter is the way you say it, to appear to His Creation and call them
to His service so that any two of them may not differ from each other? Why has He hidden
Himself from them, and has sent the Messengers to them? If He had directly come in contact with
them, more would believe in Him.
Thus, he (AS) replied to me,
Woe to you! How is He hidden from you when He showed you His Omnipotence in your own self?
He brought you into being when you did not exist. His Omnipotence is shown in your old age after
youth, in your strength after weakness, and in your weakness after strength; in your illness after
health, and your health after illness; in your pleasure after anger, and your anger after pleasure;
in your sadness after happiness, and your happiness after sadness; in liking after disliking, and in
disliking after liking; in deciding after refusing, and in refusing after deciding; in kindness after
meanness, and in meanness after kindness, in your exhortation after apprehension, and
apprehension after exhortation; in your hope after despair, and your despair after hope; in the
idea which was not in your imagination, and in the distance between what you believe from your
mind.
He was still counting to me (the proofs of) His Omnipotence in my own self, which I could not
reject, until I started believing that Allah would appear between me and him.
5. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah related to me, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the authority of Yaqub ibn Yazid, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of one he mentioned, that
Abu Abd Allah (AS) said:

_ _ m Z G C G m G OG

. _ m

Iblis said to Isa the son of Maryam (AS): "Does Your Lord have the omnipotence to place Earth
inside an egg, without making the Earth smaller or the egg any bigger?"
Thus, Isa (AS) replied, "Woe unto you! Verily, Allah cannot be described with limits. Who has
more power than He who diminishes the Earth, and enlarges the egg?"
6. My father (RA) related us that Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Yaqub ibn Yazid said, on the authority of
Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of RubI ibn Abd Allah, on the authority of al-Fudayl ibn Yasar that

125

H H H G " m G G2 L G

. G
I heard Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) that "Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, cannot be
described."
Zurarah said: Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: "Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, cannot be
described. And how could He be described when He has said in his Book: And they do not assign
to Allah the attributes due to Him?1 Thus, whatever they assign Him, He is greater than that."

7. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar
said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab, on the authority of Jafar ibn
Bashir, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Abu Hamzah that

G H G E G H H G " G m G G2 L G
2 3 H G " ^H H %

. _ C 3 H G " H E E G OG E H %

I hear Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) say: My father (AS) say: My father (AS) said: "Verily,
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Hanafiyyah was a calm man. While he was performing the
circumambulation of the Kabah - pointing with his hand - al-Hajjaj approached him and said:
"I am interested in killing someone who has your eyes."
Muhammad replied to him, "Nay! Verily, for Allah, Blessed be His name, are 300 moments
everyday in His Creation. Then probably one of them may suffice you instead of me (implying the
moment of death may come to you any time)."
8. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu al-Qasim, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sayrafi, on the authority of Ali ibn Hammad, on the authority of alMufaddal ibn Umar al-Jufi that

2 G%G G 2G G m % 3 H ! 2 3
G%G G G%G G G%G 4 G%G 2 G%G G

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 6:91, 22:74 and 39:67.
126

Z qH ! 2 3

. ! 2 3 G GH %

_ m

Verily, the Omnipotence of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, cannot be predetermined, and
worshippers have no power over His Attributes, not can they reach the core of His Knowledge or
the extent of His Majesty. There is nothing that exists besides Him. He is Light without darkness,
Truth without falsehood, Justice without oppression, and Reality without Non-reality.
He has never vanished nor ever will. He was there when there was no Earth or sky. He was there
when there was no night or day. He was there when there was no sun or moon. He was there when
there were no stars, clouds, rain or wind. Then Allah, the Blessed, the Exalted, wished to make a
creation that would revere His Majesty, glorify His Magnificence, and honor His Sublimity. Thus,
He commanded: "Be you both protectors;" therefore, they were as Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
has said.
The Compiler of this Book (RA) says: The meaning of the statement: He is Light, is that He is the One
who Illuminates and He is the Guide. The meaning of His Word: "Be you two protected" is the Holy
Spirit [al-Ruh al-Muqaddas] and the Angel Drawn Near. What is intended by this is that Allah was
there when there was nothing with Him, so He intended to create His Messengers, His Proofs, and His
Witnesses. Thus, He created before them the Holy Spirit, through which Allah, the Mighty and High,
supports His Messengers, Proofs and Witnesses, may the blessings of Allah be upon them all. It is
through the Holy Spirit that Allah guards them from the deception and the whispers of Satan. Allah
directs them, succeeds them and assists them through true thoughts.
Then He created the Trustworthy Spirit [al-Ruh al-Amin] through whom the Mighty and High sent
revelation to the Messengers, and said to both of them: Be you both protector' for My Prophets,
Messengers, Proofs, and Witnesses. He helps them through the two, assists them with their hands, and
guards them through the two. Based on this concept, it is said the Just Ruler is the Protector appointed
by Allah to guard His Earth and His Servants. The oppressed seek shelter from him, the fearful and
wayfarers feel safe by him, and through him the weak demand justice from the strong. This is Allah's
Ruler and His Proof, which the Earth is not fee from until the Day of Judgment.
9. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said, on the authority of his paternal uncle Muhammad ibn Abu
al-Qasim, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the authority of Abu Ayyub al-Madani, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Umar ibn Udhaynah, that

C G C G m GG G G G G : G G2 G
. G d G H G G!" q ! 2 3

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
The Commander of the Faithful (AS) was asked: "Does Your Lord have the power to place the
Earth in an egg, without making the Earth smaller or the egg any bigger?"
He answered, "Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, cannot be described by means of limits.
However, what you have asked is impossible."
10. Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Masrur (RA) said: al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Amir said, on the
authority of his paternal uncle Abd Allah ibn Amir, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the
authority of Aban ibn Uthman, that
127

_ m E G7 G G m GG G G G!" : G G2 G
. _ m

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
A man came to the Commander of the Faithful (AS) and asked: "Does Allah have the power to
place the Earth in an egg, without making the Earth smaller or the egg any bigger?"
Thus, he (AS) replied, "Woe unto you! Verily, Allah cannot be described by means of limits. Who
has more power than H who diminishes the Earth and enlarges the egg?"
11. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Abd Allah la-Barqi (RA) said: My father said, on the authority of his
grandfather Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Nasr that

H L I G " HG G G C G I G G7 I G G

A man came to al-Rida (AS) and enquired: "Does Your Lord have the power to place the heavens
and the Earth and whatever is between them inside an egg?"
Hence, he (AS) replied,
Of course he can! In fact, He has placed it in something even smaller than an egg. He has placed it
all in your eye, while it is smaller than an egg. For when you open it, you see the Heavens and the
Earth and whatever is in between them. IF he has willed, He would have blinded you from it all.
12. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Abu al-Qasim al-Alawi said, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki that al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan said: Muhammad ibn

I G % Z $ I Z L Hd G G L G "
E G G E I E G G I %H % G H G(R) E G L G " (c)

.. G G G!" E E G

Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Arafah that
I asked al-Rida (AS): "Did Allah create things through His Omnipotence or without it?"
Thus, He (AS) replied,
128

You cannot say that Allah created things using His Omnipotence since that would mean that
Allah created things by means of His Omnipotence. In so doing, you are saying that His
Omnipotence is something other than Him. You are saying that He used His Omnipotence as a
tool with which He creates, and that would be polytheism. When you say that Allah has created
things using His Omnipotence, it is as if you consider Omnipotence to be separate from Him, and
that He obtains His Power over things through it. However, Allah is neither weak nor incapable,
nor is He is need of others.
Muhammad ibn Ali, the Compiler of this book says: When we say that Allah is Omnipotent, we
negate any inability from Him. We do not affirm that Omnipotence co-exists along with Him,
because He, the Mighty and High, is the One and Only. I will explain the difference between the
attributes of essence and attributes of action under the chapter, Allah willing.
13. Hamzah ibn Muhammad al-Alawi (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim reported to us, on the authority of
his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Umar ibn Udhaynah,
that

~ I G H G " E I G H G " E G H H G G2 G
G H GC G I H G " G G

H G7E H G % m G G G

H G G G G G G G G

G (R) I G 3 G H G >

.. % G >

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of the Mighty and High: Nowhere
is there a secret counsel between three persons but He is the fourth of them, nor (between) five
but He is the sixth of them, nor less than that nor more but He is with them where so ever they
are.1
He (AS) said:
He is One, Unique, and Evident to His Creation. He encompasses everything by supervision,
omniscience, and omnipotence. Nothing in the Heavens and the Earth is distant from him, be it
the size of an atom, or smaller or larger than that they he does not encompass through His
knowledge. He encompasses everything by means of His Knowledge, but not by means of His
Essence, because space is comprised of four dimensions. If He embraces everything by means of
His Essence, there would imperatively be a boundary for Him.
14. Tamim ibn Abd Allah ibn Tamim al-Qurashi (RA) said: My father related to me, on the authority
of Hamdan ibn Sulayman al-Naysaburi, on the authority of Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Jahm that

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 58:7.
129

C G _ G G d G > A

G G~G d % % d G

G >
2 3 H G " _ G HG G G G 3 G 3

G G" G Y G7 % G " G d G " Z G G2G G GH ~ G G" G!" I
!

G H G HG G G G 3 G 3

H Z G 3d HI H Z HI G E 2 _ H G" H*

G E 2 _ H Z G Z G HI H Z G Z Z Z 3/4 Y G G" d G

O dG H H G%G G H G Z HI G Z L % L GH G 2 G
G H E G!" I G 3 > Z Z 2 G
G!" H Y H E C >
_q G G G G G G H

I attended al-Mamun's assembly while al-Rida Ali ibn Musa (AS) was with him. Al-Mamun
asked him: "O son of the Messenger of Allah (SA)! Do you not claim that the Prophets are
infallible?"
He (AS) replieertainly."
He asked him (AS) about some verses from the Quran. Among his questions was: "Then tell me
about the Word of Ibrahim (AS): My Lord! Show me how Thou givest life to the dead, He said:
What! And do you not believe? He said: Yes, but that my heat may be at ease."1
Al-Rida (AS) replied,
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, revealed to Ibrahim (AS) that I will choose a friend for Me from
among My Servants such that I will even revive the dead for him if he asks Me to do so. It then
occurred to Ibrahim (AS) that he was that friend.
Thus, he asked, "My Lord! Show me how Thou givest life to the dead." He said: "What! And do
you not believe?" He said: "Yes, but my heart will be at ease knowing that I am your Friend."
Then Allah said: Then take four of the birds, then train them to follow you, then place on every
mountain a part of them, then call them, they will come to you flying; and know that Allah is
Mighty, Wise."2
1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 2:260.
Translator's Note: Quran: 2:260.
130

Then Ibrahim (AS) took an eagle, a peacock, a duck, and a rooster. He chopped them into pieces
and mixed them up. He then placed a part of their mixed flesh on top of each of the ten hills in
that area. He held each bird's beak in his hand. He placed some seeds and water near himself and
called out to them. The various parts of beach bird started to fly towards each other until a
perfect body was formed. Each body went towards its own head and joined it to become a living
bird.
Then Ibrahim (AS) let their beaks go. The birds flew and then landed. They drank water, ate
some seeds, and said: "O Prophet of Allah! You have brought us back to life. May Allah bring
you back to life." Ibrahim (AS) sait is Allah who brings back to life and takes away life. He
has power over all things."
Al-Mamun said: "May Allah bless you, O Abu al-Hasan!"
The Compiler of this book says: The tradition is detailed; we have extracted from it the required
passage. I have transmitted all of it in the book Uyun Akhbar al-Rida (AS).
15. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of
Yaqub ibn Yazid, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Khazzaz, on the authority of Muthanna alKhannat, on the authority of Abu Jafar (I think it is Muhammad ibn Numan) that

H G7 H H G G G G2 L d

G GG E G7 G G%G3 G E G7 L G (R) G H G " G%G3 G

G G7 G % G Z Z Z G " Z Z G G G G%G G G O

.Z G " Z Z Z Z G % 4 % G 2 G

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: And He is
Allah in the Heavens and in the Earth.1
He (AS) replied, "He is like that in every place."
I asked, "By His Essence?"
He (AS) responded,
Woe unto you! Place implies restriction. If you say: He is in a place by His Essence, it necessarily
implies restrictions and other than that. However, He is Evident in His Creation. He encompasses
whatever He created through His Knowledge, Omnipotence, Omniscience, Reign, and
Sovereignty. His Knowledge of whatever is in the Earth is not less than His Knowledge of what is
in the Heavens. Nothing is far from Him. His Knowledge, Omnipotence, Reign, Sovereignty, and
Omniscience embrace all things.
16. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ibn
Abu Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that

H G7 G H G I L H G I Z $ G $

G7 H G " C G ~ m

E G ^ G G 2 > H L % 2G G G
1

Translator's Note: Quran: 6:3.
131

H G7 C G m % H G(R) G *

2 G m % H G(R) G G
G L GYG G % 3 d o
E G L 3 d L G % G " E _ G7 % G " G G 2 G7 % G"

Abu Shakir al-Daysani said: "There is a verse in the Quran, that surely strengthens us (the
atheists)."
I said: "Which one is it?"
So he answered, "And He it is who is God in the Heavens and God in the Earth."1
I did not know how to respond to him; therefore, when I went for hajj, I informed Abu Abd
Allah la-Sadiq (AS). He replied,
This is a statement from an evil atheist. When you return to him, say to him: "What is your name
in Kufah?" And he will say to you so-and-so. Then ask him, "What is your name in Basra?" And
he will say the same name. Then say to him: "Such is Allah, our Lord. He is God in the Heaven,
and God in the Earth. He is God in the oceans, and god in every place."
Hisham says: When I returned I went to Abu Shakir and informed him (of what Abu Abd Allah
said to me). Thus, he said: "This is transmitted from Hijaz."
17. Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Masrur (RA) said: al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Amir said, on the
authority of his paternal uncle Abd Allah ibn Amir, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the
authority of Maqatil ibn Sulayman that

G O G~G _ H G!"

. % Z > G " GGO H G"

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
When Musa (AS) went to Mount Sinai. He called unto his Lord, the Mighty and High, "O Lord,
show me your treasures!"
Thus, Allah replied, "O Musa! Verily, My Treasure is that when I intend something, I say to it:
Be and it is.'"
The Compiler of this book (RA) says: Among the proofs upon the Omnipotence of Allah, the Mighty and
High, is: the world is a creation of the Creator, since things can only be created by One who is
Omnipotent.
The disabled cannot walk, and the incapable cannot carry out actins. Hence, it is correct to say that one
who created the world is Omnipotent. If something other than this is possible then it would be possible
for us to fly without wings, and to perceive without the senses. And therefore, if the possibility of the
latter is against logic, then so is the first.

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 43:84.
132

Chapter Ten: Al-Ilm Knowledge - 16 traditions

1. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah
al-Kufi said: Musa ibn Imran, on the authority of his paternal uncle al-Husayn ibn Yazid al-Nawfali, on
the authority of Sulayman ibn Sufyan said: Abu Ali al-Qassab related to me that

.Z G%G G G R) G G%G G L G G 2 G G L
I was in the present of Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS), so I said: "All praise be to Allah whose
Knowledge has ended." He (AS) consequently replied: "Do not say that for, verily, there is no end
to His Knowledge."
2. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad al-Walid (RA) both that Muhammad ibn Yahya
al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris both, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Ali
ibn Ismail, on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority of al-Khaili that

E G7 G G G!" L 2
G G%G G H H G!" q G%G G
. G
I wrote to Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) regarding a supplication: "All praise be to Allah whose
Knowledge has ended." Hence, he replied to me: "Do not say that His Knowledge ended;'
however, you can say that His Pleasure has ended.'"
3. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Jafar al-Asadi said:
Musa ibn Imran, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu
Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The Knowledge (of Allah) is part of His Perfection."
4. My father (RA) that Sad ibn Abd Allah, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of
Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Abu al-Hasan al-Sayrafi, on the authority of Bakkar al-Wasiti, on
the authority of Abu Hamzah al-Thumali, on the authority of Humran ibn Ayun, that

133

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said the following concerning knowledge; "It is like your hand is from
you."
Muhammad ibn Ali, the Compiler of this book says: This (tradition) means that the knowledge of Allah
is not other than Him, and is part of His Essential attributes, because Allah, the Mighty and High, is AllKnowing, All-Hearing, and All-Seeing. On the contrary, our intent in attributing Him with knowledge is
to negate ignorance from Him. We do not say: "Knowledge is separate from Him" since "Allah has
always been Omniscient." If we said that His Knowledge is separate from Him, we would be saying that
something eternal has always existed alongside Him. Exalted is Allah, the Elevated and Great, from
such things!
5. My father (RA) that Sad ibn Abd Allah, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hisham, on the authority of
Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Mansur ibn Hazim, that

H 2

. >

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) "Do you know everything that has happened and
everything that will happen until the Day of Judgement? Is it not part of Allah's knowledge?"
He (AS) answeret is certainly part of Allah's Knowledge. He knew everything before He
created the Heavens and the Earth."
6. Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA), on the authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ashari, on the authority of Ali ibn Ismaiil and Ibrahim ibn
Hashim both, on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Mansur ibn Hazim that

H H G G G G7 4 G G 2 G m % d :

. >
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (ASs there anything that exists today that was not in the
Knowledge of Allah, the Mighty and High?" He (AS) replied: "No, His Knowledge encompassed
everything even before He raised the Heavens and the Earth."
7. Al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA) said: My father related to me that Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail ibn Bazigh, on the authority of Yunus, on the authority of Abu alHasan, on the authority of Jabir that

134

G%G H G G G 3 G7 G G H G H 3 _ G7 ! L 2 3

E 4 H C G H 2 G H G m E 4 C 2 m

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: Verily, Allah, the One - may His Names be Blessed and Exalted in
His Elevated Essence - united everything in His Unity, then applied it to His Creation. Therefore,
He is Alone, the Needless, the Master, and the glorified. Everything serves Him, and everything
depends upon Him. Our Lord is beyond our grasp, and our Lord's Knowledge encompasses
everything.
8. Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Abd al-Walid said: Ahmad ibn al-Fadl ibn al-Mughirah said: Abu
Nasr Mansur ibn Abd Allah ibn Ibrahim al-Isfahani said: Ali ibn Abd Allah said: al-Husayn ibn
Bashshar, that

H HG" H H G G 2 G G G ! H G " H G " m

G I H G" % I G C GH G G

3 H G G O G % I G H % H H
G G Z G % G H H G
~G" _ Y G G 2_ Y

G I G I G % G Z G2 Z ! C 2 I 2 Z G

I asked Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS): "Does Allah know the things which have not
occurred that if they did occur how would they be or He does not?"
He (AS) said: Verily, Allah, the Exalted be He, is aware of all things even before they come into
existence. Allah, the Mighty and High, says: Surely, We wrote what you did,1 and He says to the
people going to the Hell: And if they were sent back, they would certainly go back to that which
they are forbidden, and most surely the are liars.2 Hence, Allah the Mighty and High, knew that if
He sent them back, they would certainly go back to what they were forbidden.
And he said to the angels when they said: What! Wilt Thou place in it such as shall make mischief
in it and shed blood, and we celebrate Thy praise and extol Thy holiness? He said: Surely, I know
what you do not know.3 Therefore, the Knowledge of Allah, the Mighty and High, is eternal, and
1

Translator's Note: Quran: 45:29.
Translator's Note: Quran: 6:28.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 2:30.
2

135

embraces all things even before they are created. Blessed be our Lord, the Exalted, the Elevated,
and the Great, who created things and had knowledge of them prior to their creation. Verily, our
Lord has always been All-Knowing, All-Hearing, and All-Seeing.
9. An the same chain of narrators that on the authority of Ali ibn Abd Allah that Safwan ibn Yahya, on
the authority of Abd Allah ibn Muskan that

m
! 2 3 G G G G2 L d
% G G % H G 3 2 G G Z G ! %
.G G G%G G G G G G

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He: "Did He have
knowledge of location before He created location? Or did He come to know if it when He was
creating it or after He had created it?" So he (AS) repliexalted is Allah! Verily, he knew
about space before He created space in the same fashion that He knew about if after He brought it
into being. His Knowledge of space is the same as His Knowledge of all things."
The Compiler of this book, may Allah be pleased with him, says: Another proof that Allah, Blessed and
Exalted be He, is Omniscient, is that action, planning, and work, can only be orchestrated by
intelligence and not from ignorance, since it most surely requires wisdom. Not only can action,
planning, and work not originate from ignorance, they cannot continue to operate without intelligence.
Do you not see that one who does not know the art of goldsmithing cannot make an earring, even while
placing every tiny essential piece in its position? Neither it is possible for someone who does not know
how to write to write a book in which every word is in accordance with the previous. The All-Knowing
is More Magnificent in work, and more amazing in establishment, than what we have described. Hence,
it is certainly impossible for creation to have originated from a non-knower. The confirmation of this is
(to be found in the following tradition):
10. What Abd al-Walid ibn Muhammad ibn Abdus al-Attar (RA) said: Ali ibn Muhammad ibn
Qutaybah al-Naysaburi, on the authority of al-Fadl ibn Shadhan that

C G x 3 G G O m
2 G%G G G % G % G E 4 H

.G 2 G
Al-Rida Ali ibn Musa (AS) said the following in one of his supplications:
Glory be to Him who created the creation by His Power, ascertained what He created by His
Wisdom, and placed everything in its place through His Knowledge. Glorified be He who knows
136

stealthy looks, and who knows what breast conceal. There is nothing like Him. And He is the AllHearing, the All-Seeing.
11. My father (RA) reported that Sad ibn Abd Allah, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the
authority of Ibn Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam, on the authority of Mansur alSayqal that

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Verily, Allah is Knowledge as there is no ignorance in Him.
Allah is Life as there is no death in Him. And Allah is Light as there is no darkness in Him."
12. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman that

I said to Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (ASt has been related to us that Allah is Knowledge as there is
no ignorance in Him. Allah is life as there is no death in Him. And Allah is Light as there is no
darkness in Him." He (AS) replied: "That is exactly how He is."
13. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Hisham
ibn al-Hakam, on the Isa ibn Abu Mansur, on the authority of Jabir al-Jufi, that

.G%G > G%G I G G%G

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: "Verily, Allah is Light as there is no darkness in Him, Allah is
Knowledge as there is no ignorance in Him. And Allah is Life as there is no death in Him."

14. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Abd Allah ibn Jafar al-Himyari, on the
authority of Ahmand ibn Muhammad, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Ibn
Sinan, on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS), that

H % G O G% G G H G

C G H d Z Z G Z

H % G O G% G H % G % H G(R) C % G H G G

137

His father, Muhammad al-Baqir (AS), said:
Verily, for Allah, Exalted be He, there is specific knowledge, and there is common knowledge. As
for the specific knowledge, it is the knowledge of which even the Closest Angels and Messengers
(AS) are not informed. And as for the common knowledge, it is the knowledge that His Closest
Angels and Messengers know, and which has reached us from the Messengers of Allah."
15. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Jafar al-Asadi,
on the authority of Musa ibn Imran, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Yazid, on the authority of Zayd
ibn al-Madil al-Numayri and Abd Allah ibn Sinan, on the authority of Jabir, that

H % G O % m Z G % m Z G H G "

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: "Verily, there is knowledge known to Allah alone, and verily there
is knowledge which is known to His Closest Angels and Messengers. We also know it."
16. And the same chain of narrators that on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Yazid, on the authority of
Yahya ibn Abu Yahya, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn al-Samit, on the authority of Abd al-Ala, on
the authority of al-Abd al-Salih that

. G%G G G % G 2 G G G }
m
Musa ibn Jafar (AS) said: The Knowledge of Allah cannot be described in terms of where,' nor
can the Knowledge of Allah be described in terms of how.' Knowledge cannot be separated from
Allah, nor can Allah be separated from Knowledge. There is no boundary between Allah and His
Knowledge.

138

Chapter Eleven: Sifat al-Dhat wa Sifat al-Afal Attributes of Essence
and Attributes of Actions - 19 traditions

> > >
1. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim
said on the authority Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Tayalisi al-Khazzaz al-Kufi on the authority of Safwan
ibn Yahya on the authority of Ibn Muskan on the authority of Abu Basir that
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:

H %3 G H H H G m G G2 L G
*
2 %3

% 3 *
2 % 3

H G " Z _ G L G *
G 2 *
2 G

Even in His Essence, and before anything existed, Allah, our Lord, the High and the Mighty,
possessed all knowledge. Even in His Essence, and before a sound could be heard, He was AllHearing. Even in His Essence, when there was nothing to be seen, He was All-Seeing. Even in His
Essence, when there was not physical existence, He was Omnipotent. Although they existed prior
to creation, it was only creation that these attributes manifested themselves: His Hearing upon the
heard, His Seeing upon the seen, and His Omnipotence over the physical world.
He says: I asked, "Then, Allah was not a Speaker?" He (AS) replied, "Verily, speech is an
accidental [muhdathah] attribute and not sempiternal [azaliyyah]. Allah, the Mighty and High,
exited when no speakers existed."
2. My father (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn Isa said,
on the authority of Ismail ibn Sahl, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa that

H~ m G L m H~ m G L G G2 L d

2 G ~ *
. G

139

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "Does Allah know everything from sempiternity?"He (AS)
replied, "What was He to know when there was nothing to be known?" He says, I asked, "Does
Allah hear from sempiternity?" He (AS) answered, "Who was He to hear when there was nothing
to be heard?" He says, I asked, "Does Allah see from sempiternity?" He (AS) responded, "Who
was He to see when there was nothing to be seen?" Then he (AS) said: "Allah has always been AllKnowing, All-Hearing, All-Seeing, sempiternally, and the Possessor of the Knowledge of Hearing
and Seeing."
3. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah
al-Kufi said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki that al-Fadl ibn Sulayman al-Kufi
said, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn al-Khalid saying that

% L Z G Z G Z G Z Z G Z G ! 2 3 G m

E G G Z G E G Z E G Z G E G G Z G H H

G G # Z I G $ G 3H G G%G G E* 2 G Z G E G Z G

G m H ! G%G3 G Z G Z G Z G Z Z G Z G H H G H E 4

Al-Rida Ali ibn Musa (AS) said: "Allah, the Blessed the Exalted, has always been All-Knowing,
All-Powerful, Ever-Living [hay], Ever-Lasting [qadim], All-Hearing, and All-Seeing."
I asked him "O son of the Messenger of Allah! There is a group that says: Allah has always been
All-Knowing with Knowledge, All-Powerful with His Might, Ever-Living with His Life, EverLasting with His Past, All-Hearing with His Hearing, and All-Seeing with His Sight."
Thus, he (AS) replied, "Verily, whoever says this and believes in it is a polytheist. He is not under
our Guardianship at all." He then added, "Allah, the Mighty and High, has always been AllKnowing, All-Powerful, Ever-Living, Ever-Lasting, All-Hearing, and all-Seeing by His Essence.
Exalted is He, the Elevated, the Great, from what the polytheists and anthropomorphists say."
4. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamdani (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Harun ibn
Abd al-Malik that

G G G E 4 G7 2 L 2 H H G G H G G G2 G

_ >

G >

G H >

! 2 3 GG H G "
G 3 >
Y >

140

G H GC C I G % > I G%G
>

.>
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked about Divine Unity; thus, he said: He, the Mighty and
High, is undoubtedly Existent. He is not vain or numerable, nor can He be described on the basis
of the attributes of creation. He, the Mighty an High, possesses Qualities [nuut] and Attributes
[sifat]. There are Attributes which apply to Him which can also be applied to the created such a
hearing [sami], seeing [basir], affectionate [raur], merciful [Rahim], and their likes.
Whereas the Qualities are qualities of Essence; they do not befit anyone but Allah, the Blessed
and Exalted. Allah is Light as there is no darkness in Him. He is Ever-Living as there is no death
for Him. He is All-Knowing as there is no ignorance in Him. He is Needless [Samad] as there is no
need in Him. Our Lord is Light by Essence, Ever-Living by Essence, All-Knowing by Essence,
and Needless by Essence.

5. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said: My paternal uncle Muhammad ibn Abu al-Qasim related
to me, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al Barqi, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn al-Nadr al-Khazzaz, on the authority of Amr ibn Shimr, on the authority of
Jabir that

Z G G%G G Z G G%G Z 4

! 2 3
.Z G G G%G > Z G%G I

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, was there when there was
nothing but Him. He was Light as there was no darkness in Him. He was the Truth as there was
no falsehood in Him. He was Omniscient as there was no ignorance in Him. He was the EverLiving as there was no death in Him. And that is how He is today, and that is how He will remain
forever.
6. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said:
al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan ibn Aban said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Auramah that Yahya ibn
Yahya said on the authority of Abd Allah ibn al-Samit, on the authority of Abd al-Ala that

H G " % G" H G " : }

4 % I G 2 m H G Z G%G G E 4

E G E G Z Z IG" H H
G%G G G Z G G%GO Y G " 2 G G G

G 2 G I % I G 2 m E G m G%GO Y G " Z G Z G 2 Z G
141

I C G%G G E 4 G G m

G d Y % G G%G G I E G E

2

3 % % I H G " G E 4 C E G Z #$
. G C
Al-Abd al-Salih Musa ibn Jafar (AS) said: Verily, Allah, there is no god but He, is Ever-living,
but not in terms of quality or place. He is not in thing or on anything. He has not created for His
Position any space. He is not strengthened through creation. Nothing that he has created is like
Him. He was not powerless over things before their creation, not will He be powerless over them
after they have gone. He, the Mighty and High, is the Ever-Living god without accidental
existence. He is the Sovereign before creating something and He is its Master after creating it.
Allah does not have any limits. He is not recognized by a thing that may be His like. He is not
subject to aging. He does not raise His Voice to invoke anything, and with His Fear all things
become stunned. Allah is Ever-Living, and not the product of accidental existence or a depicted
existence. He neither has a restricted quality, nor a still space, but He is Ever-Living by Himself
and the Master who is Eternally Omnipotent. He created what He willed when He willed, with His
Will and Power. He is the First without any quality, and the Last without any space. Everything is
perishable but He (His face). His is the creation and the command; blessed is the Lord of the
worlds.
7. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said, on the
authority of al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan ibn Aban, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Auramah, on the
authority of Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Khalid ibn Yazid, on the authority of
Abd al-Ala, that

>

I E 4 G% E 4 C G G : G G2 G

G G G G % H b E G
_ G G G H Z G I C G L H G " E G!"

G m % H H H G G G(R)G H I

G H G G I E GG E G

I G%GO dG H m E 4 G G G G m H G" % G m G%G % G m GG
142

I G m G G % H G G
G " % G G % G%G G G GG H G " G G 3 GG H G " Z

E G m 3 G I H H G G G2G G d E G G G G dG

H H G E m % H G I_ G H G " G G H G E
. G C 2
3 G G " q G % 3 G " H

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: Allah's name is other than Him. The identifier is always other
than the identified. Since very identifier is created, it is other than Allah. Everything which is
uttered by tongues or produced by hands is created. Allah is the destination of whoever seeks
Him. The aimer is other than the aimed. The aimed is described, and every description is created.
The Creator of all Things is not described through the limitations of the named. He is not formed
so that His Formation may be known through the creation of others. If He is aimed, what is aimed
is other than Him. He is never disregarded by those who understand this conclusion, and that is
pure unity. Thus, have faith in Him, accept Him, and try to understand Him with the permission
of Allah, the Mighty and High. Whoever claims that he has recognized Allah through a veil, an
image or a similarity, is a polytheist because veil, image and similarity are other than Him.
Verily, He is One United Being. Therefore, how can one profess to believe in Divine Unity if he
claims to have recognized Him by means of other than Him? Only he has recognized Allah who
recognizes Him by means of Allah (Himself). Thus, whoever does not recognize Him through Him
has not recognized Him, and has certainly recognized other than Him. Allah is the Creator of All
Things and is not from a thing. He is named by His Names. Hence, He is other than His Names,
and His Names are other than Him. The described is other than the describer. Therefore,
whoever claims that he knows what he does not recognize is ignorant.
The created do not comprehend anything but by means of Allah, and they do not comprehend the
recognition of Allah but by Allah. Allah is free from His Creation, and His Creation is free from
Him. If Allah intends something, it is as He intends it by His Command, and without utterance.
There is no refuge for His servants from what He decrees. There is no argument for them in what
He sanctions. They do not have power over an action or treatment from what He brings forth in
their created bodies except by their Lord. Thus, whoever claims that he has strength over an
action that Allah, the Mighty and High, does not intend, he has claimed that his intent has
overcome the Intent of Allah. Blessed is Allah the lord of the Worlds!
8. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said: my paternal uncle Muhammad ibn Abu al-Qasim related
to me that Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sayrafi al-Kufi related to me that Muhammad ibn Sinan related to
me, on the authority of Aban ibn Uthman al-Ahmar that

L Y Z G Z G Z G Z G ! 2 3 G G G~G E H G }

Z G E* 2 G Z G E G Z G ! 2 3 H G " m GL 3

143

H G " E 4 G G G I G%G G H qG

. G G
G H > ! 2 3
I asked al-Sadiq Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS), "Inform me about Allah, the Blessed and Exalted.
Has He sempiternally been All-Hearing, All-Seeing, All-Knowing, and All-Powerful?"
He (AS) replied, "Of course." Hence, I asked him, "There is a man who professes to be a friend of
the Household of the Prophet (AS) and says: Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has always
been All-Seeing with an ear, All-Hearing with an eye, All-Knowing by Knowledge, and AllPowerful with power." He (AS) became angry and then said: "Verily, whoever says this and
believes in it, is a polytheist and is not under our Guardianship at all. Verily, Allah, the Blessed
and Exalted, is the Possessor of the Knowledge of Hearing, Seeing, and Omnipotence."

9. Hamzah ibn Muhammad al-Alawi (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim reported to us, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Hammad, on the authority of Hariz, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim, that

E G E G E G GC G G G G : G

m G H G G *
G 2 *
G 2 G G G m % H G G G G G L G L

L m G *
G 2 *
G 2 G m G G % H G" G ! I 2H

G m H G" ! %G m G % H

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: "Among the attributes of the Being without beginning [qadim] are
that He is One, Unique, Needless, Unique in meaning, and not subject to multiple meanings."
He says: I asked him, "May I be your ransom! A group of Iraqis claim that He hears with
something other than what He sees, and He sees with something other than what He hears from."
Thus, he (AS) replied, "They have lied, apostatized, and anthropomorphized. Exalted is Allah
from that! Verily, He is All-Hearing, and All-Seeing. He hears with what He sees, and He sees
with what He hears." He says: I asked, "They claim that He is All-Seeing as they see."
Thus, he (AS) replied, "Exalted is Allah! Verily, Allah cannot be understood by means of human
qualities."
10. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of al-Abbas ibn Amr, on the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that
An atheist asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS), "Do you say that He is All-Hearing, All-Seeing?"

G G 2 G G % % H G G2 d G H G

G%G G m % H G" G! G%G G *
G 2 G%G G m E $G G G E G G G G G G
144

d GZ O L G" Z I G" Z L G" OG Y Z 2G > _G #$
4 H 4 % H
% H G!" H G " G G7 GeG OG Y G2 H I G" > _G % % H H G%_ G m

G G >
G G G G2 G G 2 G
.

Thus, Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied, He is All-Hearing, and All-Seeing. He is All-Hearing and AllSeeing, but without the use of visual or auditory organs. Rather, He hears by Himself, and He sees
by Himself. My statement is not that He hears by Himself in the sense that His Hearing is one
thing, and His Self is another. Rather, my goal is to respond to what I was asked using
terminology that can be readily understood. Hence, when I say that He hears by means of His
Entire Essence, I say so to stress that He is not composed of parts. MY goal is to make you
understand. My only other recourse would be to say that He is All-Hearing, All-Seeing, AllKnowing, and All-Aware without any conflict between essence and concept.
11. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar (RA) said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of alQasim ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Abd al-Samad ibn Bashir, on the authority of Fudayl ibn
Sukkarah that

% H 2 m o
G _ L G " G L G L

G Z 2 %H ! 2 3 m

% H G " G G G 2 % H m I

G G G!" G _ G_ L G (R) G G7 % % H dG Z G

. o
G ! 2 3 Z G ! q

I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS): May I be taken as your ransom! I hope that you can tech me.
Prior to creation, did Allah, may His Remembrance be Exalted, know that He was One? Your
followers have a dispute regarding this issue. Some of them say: "The Blessed and Exalted surely
knew that He was alone before He created anything from His Creation/" While others say:
"Verily, the meaning of knowing is doing. Therefore, He knows today that there was no one other
than Him before He created the thngs." And they say: "If we prove that He has always known
that ere was none but Him, then we have proved that there was other than Him in sempiternity
[azaliyyah]. If you could be so kind, O my Master, to teach me whether the truth is other than
this. Thus, he (AS) wrote: "Allah, the Exalted, has always been All-Knowing, Blessed and Exalted
be His Remembrance."
145

12. My father (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn alHusayn ibn Abu al-Khattab, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that

.G G%G 2 G%G % G H G Z G 4

I heard Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) say: "Allah was there when there was nothing other than Him.
He has always been All-Knowing of what He has created. Therefore, His Knowledge of thins
before their being is exactly the same as His Knowledge of things after their creation."

13. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ayyub
ibn Nuh that

m I H 2 m
H H G G % d m G G G!" q % H
G%_ G H H G H G G I G3 I I H G

. G G G%G G 2 G G Z G G

I wrote to Abu al-Hasan al-Naqi (AS) asking him about Allah, the Mighty and High: "Did He
have knowledge of things before He created them or did He know them only after He created
them?" He (AS) wrote in his own handwriting: "Allah's knowledge of things was the same before
He created them and after He created them."
14. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar
and Sad ibn Abd Allah both said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority
of his father and al-Husayn ibn Sad and Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqi, on the authority of Ibn Abu
Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim that

H L >

L 3 G! G G 2 G L

G%G I G G%G > G%G % 3

G H G G G G L k

I entered into the presence of Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) so he asked me: "Can you describe
Allah?" Hence, I replied, "Yes." He (AS) saiive me your description." So, I answered, "He is
the All-Hearing and the All-Seeing." He (AS) explained, "There are attributes which equally
apply to the created." I asked, "Then how do you describe Him?" Thus, he (AS) saie is Light
as there is no darkness in Him. He is Ever-Living as there is no death in Him. He is the
Omniscient as there is no ignorance in Him, and He is the Truth as there is no false in Him."
146

Then I left from his presence and I was the most learned of people with regard to Divine Unity.
15. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: al-Husayn ibn Aban said, on the
authority of al-Husayn ibn Sad, on the authority of al-Nadr ibn Suwayd, on the authority of Asin ibn
Humayd, that

H Z G Z G % E G H G "
G H G " Z G G % L : G G2 G
.

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) saying that I asked him: "Has Allah always existed?"
Thus, he (AS) replied, "Verily, the Willer can only exist if He has a Will. In fact, He has always
been All-Knowing, All-Powerful, then He intended."
16. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah
al-Kufi said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn
al-Hasan, on the authority of Bakr ibn Salih, on the authority of Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of alHasan ibn al-Jahm, on the authority of Bukayr ibn Ayun that

H 3 H G G G G H G G % H G G G G G2 GG L
G (R) d m %H G G " G G "

.G H G G G G G G H

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "Are the Knowledge and Will of Allah separate or
united?" Thus, he (AS) replied, The Knowledge of Allah is not the same as the Will of Allah. Do
you not say that you will do something Allah willing', yet you do not say that you will do
something Allah knowing.' Therefore, your statement Allah willing' is a proof that He did not
will it, If He had willed, it would have been as He had willed. Allah's Knowledge is prior to
Allah's Will.
17.Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA) said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abd al-Jabbar, on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya that

GH G G G G G G G G G G G~G G GG L

C I _ % H G G % G " % 3 G (R) H H G G H G G G G % 2

G G G G I % H G >
% m G

G G I G G (R) G >

EnC E H G E G G E E G
147

I enquired from Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim (ASnform me about the Will. Is it a part of Allah or
is it of the Creation? Hence, he (AS) answered, The will is part of the created conscience, and it
manifest itself in action. As for Will of Allah, the Mighty and High, then it is His Making [ihdath]
and none other than that because He does not reflect, does not imagine, and does not think. These
attributes cannot be applied to Him as they are attributes of creation. Thus, Allah's Will is action
and nothing else. He says to it: "Be and it is," without a word or speech expressed by tongue, by
imagination or by thought. His Will is expressed without form in the same way that He is without
form.
18. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid, on the authority of is father, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Ibn
Udhaynah, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that

. H G : G G 2 G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The will is accidental [muhdathah]."
19. My father (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Umar ibn Udhaynah, that

. G H G G H I G G H G : G G2 G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Allah created the Will itself, then created everything by
means of the Will."
The Compiler of this book (RA) says: If we attribute Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, with Attributes of
Essence, then each one of these attributes negates its opposite. Thus, when we say: He is Ever-Living,
we have negated from Him the opposite of life, which is death. When we say: He is all-Knowing; we
have negated from Him the opposite of knowledge, which is ignorance. When we say: He is AllHearing; we negate from Him the opposite of hearing, which is deafness. When we say: He is AllSeeing; we negate from Him the opposite of seeing, which is blindness. When we say: He is the
Honorable; we negate from Him the opposite of honor, which is dishonor.
When we say: He is the All-Wise; we negate from Him the opposite of wisdom, which is error. When we
say: He is the Self-Sufficient; we negate from Him the opposite of self-sufficiency, which is neediness.
When we say: He is Just; we negate from Him oppression and tyranny. When we say: He is the
Forbearing; we negate from Him impatience. When we say: He is the Omnipotent; we negate from Him
incapability. If we did not do that we would have proved Him with things that have always been with
Him. When we say "He has always been Ever-Living, All-Knowing, All-Hearing, All-Seeing,
Honorable, All-Wise, Self-Sufficient, Sovereign, Forbearing, Just, and Generous [karim]" we have used
these Attributes of Essence in order to negate their opposites.
We have proved that Allah has always been the One and Only. The Intent, the Will, the Pleasure, the
Wrath or any of the other Attributes of Action are of the same intensity as the Attributes of Essence
because it is not permissible to say: Allah has always been the Intender and the Willer, like it is
permissible to say: Allah has always been Omnipotent and All-Knowing.

148

Chapter Twelve: The Commentary of verse 88 of Chapter 28 the
Narrative [al-Qasas] Everything is perishable but He. 11 traditions

%I H G " G E 4 C
1. My father, may Allah have mercy on him, said that Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail ibn Bazi on the authority of
Mansur ibn Yunus on the authority of Jalis for Abu Hamzah on the authority of Abu Hamzah
that

G I %I H G " G E 4 C H H G L

H G " % 2 E 4 C
. % G G H % % G H G " G E 4 C G G% G

I asked Abu Jafar al-baqir (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High:
Everything is perishable but He (His Face). He (AS) replied:Everything will perish, but
the Face [al-wajh] will remain. Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, is Greater than being
attributed with a face. However, the meaning of this is that everything will perish except
His Religion and Face, from which He bestows.
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid, may Allah be pleased with him, said:
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar on the authority of Yaqub ibn Yazid on the authority of
Safwan ibn Yahya on the authority of Abu Said al-Mukari on the authority of Abu Basir on the
authority of al-Harith ibn al-Mughayrah al-Nasri that

1/2
G H G " G E 4 C % I H G " G E 4 C H H G G G G2 L d

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High:
Everything is perishable but him. He (AS) answereverything is perishable except
the one who followed the Right Path."
3. Muhammad ibn ali Majilawayh, may Allah have mercy on him, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Nasr on the authority of Safwan al-Jammal that

149

E H G G G%G G % I H G " G E 4 C H G G G7 G G2 G
G I G H % I G G G G H G O

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High, Everything is perishable but He. He said: "The face that will not perish refers to
any person who carried out what Allah commanded him through obedience to
Muhammad (SA) and the Imams (AS) after Him." After this he (AS) recited: Whoever
obeys the Messenger, he indeed obeys Allah.1
4. And the same chain of narrators that

G I G H G % G G 2
.
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "We are the Face [wajh] of Allah, which does not
perish."
5. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawkkil, may Allah have mercy on him, said: Ali ibn alHusayn al-Sadabadi on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi, on the authority
of his father on the authority of Rabi al-Warraq on the authority of Salih ibn Sahl that

. %I H G " G E 4 C H G G G7 G G2 G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High, Every this is perishable but He. He (AS) said: "We."
6. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar, may Allah have mercy on him, on the authority
of his father on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad on the authority of Yaqub ibn Yazid on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Sinan on the authority Abu Sallam on the authority of some of
our scholars that

G G7 q H G % H G GH G~ : E} G .

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 4:80.
150

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: We are the Oft-Repeated1 Ones that Allah bestowed to our
Prophet (SA). We are the Face [wajh] of Allah. And (wih all this) we live among you.
Whoever recognizes us, and whoever is ignorant of us faces certain death [yaqin].

% % Y d % d $ a
The Compiler of this book, may Allah be pleased with him, says: The meaning of his (AS)
statement: "We are the oft-repeated" is that we are the ones that the Prophet (SA) joined with
the Quran, and made a will to remain attached to the Quran and to us. Hence, he (SA)
informed his Ummah that we will not separate from each other, until we meet him at the Pool
(of Kawthar in Paradise).
7. My father, may Allah have mercy on him, that Sad ibn Ad Allah, on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Isa on the authority of Ali ibn Sayf on the authority of his brother alHasan ibn Sayf on the authority of his father Sayf ibn Amirah al-Nakhai on the authority of
Khaythamah that

G G % G %I H G " G E 4 C H H G G G G2 L d
G H G % G G H % G G G2G G7 % % I G

G IG G (R) HGH L HG G IG L G G2G G7 % G
. q

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High:
Everything is perishable but He. He (AS) resplied: It is His Religion. The Messenger of
Allah (SA) and the Commander of the Faithful (AS) are the Religion of Allah amongst
His Servants, His Face, His Eyes, His tongue with which He speaks and the Hand with
which He covers His Creation. We are the Face with which He bestows (His Blessings).
1

Translator's Note: This refers to the verse: "And certainly We have given you seven of the
Oft-Repeated and the Grand Quran" (Quran: 15:87). It says of the oft-repeated,' which
means that the repeated ones may be the seven verse of the Opening Chapter [al-Fatihah].
However, the verse says that these seven Repeated Ones are parallel to the Quran, as the
Opening is included in it. The seven repeated ones given to the Holy Prophet (SA) are: Ali,
Fatimah, Hasan, Husayn, Muhammad, Jafar and Musa (AS). Hence, he (SA) has said in the
final sermon in the plains of Ghadir: "I am leaving behind two weighty things amongst you: the
Book of Allah, and my progeny. If you remain attached to them, you will never go astray after
me. Verily, they will not separate from each other until they meet me at the Pool of Kawthar."
Bihar al-Anwar by Allamah Majlisi vol.23 p.106, al-Ihtijaj by Tabarsi vol.2 p.337/510, Sahih
Muslim 4:1874, Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal 3:14, Al-Mustadrak by Al-Hakim al-Nayshaburi
3:109, Tafsir by Ibn Kathir 4:114, Tafsir al-Durr by al-Manthur by Suyuti 5:702, and many other
sources. For more details see [Ghayat al-Maram].
151

We will remain in His Servants as long as Allah has any consideration [rawiyyah] for
them. I enquired, "What is consideration [rawiyyah]? He (AS) explained, "Need [alhajah]. When Allah has no need for them He removes us from them, and does as He
pleases."
8. Ali ibn ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq, may Allah have mercy on him said:
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: alHusayn ibn al-Hasan said: Bakr on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Said on the authority of alHaytham ibn Abd Allah on the authority of Marwan ibn Sabah that

G G2G G7 % d H d H H

C G H % % G G H %I G H G H GG G2G 2 G H % G

G G O G7 % G O G%

. G 2 G 2 G 3 2G G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:Verily, Allah the Mighty and High, made us the best
of creation, and moulded us from the best of moulds. He made us His Eye though
which He sees His Servants. He made us the Tongue with which He speaks to His
Creation. He made us the Outspread Hand of Mercy over His Servants. He made us the
Face through which He bestows His Bounties.1 He made us the Gate that leads to Him.
And He made us His Treasure in the Heaven and on His Earth. It is due to us2 that trees
bear fruits, that fruit ripens, that rivers flow, that clouds shower down rain, and that the
Earth grows grass. It is through our service [ibadah], Allah is served. If it were not for
us, Allah would not have been worshipped.3
9. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil, may Allah have mercy on him, said: Abd Allah ibn
Jafar al-Himyari on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa on the authority of alHasan ibn Mahbub on the authority of Abd al-Aziz on the authority of Ibn Abu Yafur that
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:

E m G G I G" H Z G G G G _ G

% G G H % I G%G G % H I G G2G G7 G H
1

Editor's Note: Everything which exists was created out of Allah's love for the Prophet,
Fatimah, Ali, Hasan, and Husayn. Hence, they are the reason for the bounties we receive
from Allah. As Almighty Allah has said: "Were it not for Muhammad, I would not have created
you" (Hakim).
2
Translator's Note: The Imam is referring to the Fourteen Infallibles (AS).
3
Editor's Note: As Imam al-Baqir or Imam al-Sadiq said: "Verily, Allah never leaves the Earth
without a person with (complete) knowledge. If it were so, truth would never be known from
falsehood" (Kulayni).
152

G G% C G H % Ga % 2 G H % G %
. G 2 G H G G 2 G

Verily, Allah is One [Wahid], Alone [Ahad], Sole in His Unity [Mutawahhid], Unique in
His Affair. He made a creatin, and authorized it in the mattes of His Religion, and we are
that creation. O son of Abu Yafur! We are the Proof [hujjah] of Allah among His
servants, and we are His Witnesses to His Creation, the Trustees of His Revelation, the
Treasurers of His Knowledge, the Face with which He bestows His Bounties, the Eye
with which He sees His Creatures, the Tongue with which He talks, the Heart which
embraces (in love), the Door that guides to Him, the Vicegerents with His Command,
and the Callers to His Path. It is due to us that Allah was recognized and due to us that
Allah was worshipped. We are the Guides unto Allah. Were it not for us, Allah would not
have been worshipped.
10. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said: Abu Said al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sukkari
said: al-Hakam ibn Aslam said: Ibn Ulayyah on the authorityi of al-Jariri, on the authority of

H G (R) % I G 2 m % I H2 E G m Z C G H G

Abu al-Ward ibn Thumamah, on the authority of Ali (AS) that The Prophet (SA) heard a
man say to the other: "May Allah make your face and the one who resembles you ugly!"
So He (SA) said: "Wait a minute! Do not say this for verily Allah created Adam (AS) in
His Image."
The Compiler of this book (RA) says: The anthropomorphists took out the first part of this
tradition and said: Verily, Allah created Adam in His Image."1 Hence, they went astray in this
meaning and led others astray.
11. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamadani (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the
authority of His father, on the authority of Ali ibn Mabad, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn
Khalid that

G%G3 $ H G " G H

G%G2G G m G G H G G H G H G " GG H I 3
1

Editor's Note: Despite believing that God incarnated Himself in Jesus, the Roman Catholic
Church rejects the notion that god is in man's image. See: Cathechim of the Roman Catholic
Church. Ottawa: Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops, 1994: edict 370, page85
153

H G (R) GG G 2 I G 2 m % I H2

I said to al-Rida (AS): "O Son of the Messenger of Allah! Verily, the people relate that
the Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "Verily, Allah created Adam (AS) in His Image.""
He (AS) replied: May Allah kill them! They have certainly removed the first part of the
tradition. The Messenger of Allah (SA) passed by two men who were cursing each
other. He (SA) heard one of them say to the other: "May Allah make your face and the
one who resembles you ugly!" He (SA) said: "O servant of Allah! Do not say this to your
brother for, verily Allah, the Mighty and High, created Adam (AS) in His Image."

154

Chapter Thirteen: The Commentary of Verse 75 of Chapter 38 Sad O
Iblis! What prevented you that you should do obeisance to him
whom I created with My Two Hands? - 2 traditions

1. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad Imran al-Daqqaq, may Allah have mercy on him, said,
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: alHusayn ibn al-Hasan said: Bakr on the authority of Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi on the authority of
Abd Allah ibn Bahr on the authority of Abu Ayyub al-Khazzaz on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Muslim that

H G 2 o

G G E G G E G m H % G E G H

. G Y
I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) about the Word of the Mighty and High: "O Iblis! What
prevented you that you should do obeisance to hi whom I created with My Two
Hands?" He (AS) replied: In the Arabic language, the hand symbolized power and
bounty. As Allah says: And remember Our servant Dawud, the Possessor of Power.1 He
also says: And the Heaven, We raised it high with power.2 Here the word hands [aydi]
mean power. He says: And whom He has strengthened with an inspiration from Him.3
Here the word hand [ayyad] means strengthening. It is also said (in Arabic): I have
many hands with me from so and so, implying excess and beneficence, and me so and
so has a white hand, implying bounty.
2. Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Isam al-Kulayni, may Allah have mercy on him, said:
Muhammad ibn Yaqub al-Kulayni said: Ahmad ibn Idris on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa on the authority of Ali ibn Sayf on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Ubaydah that

G GG H H G G _ L d :

I asked al-Rida (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High, to Iblis: What
prevented you that you should do obeisance to him whom I created with My Two
1

Translator's Note: Quran: 38:17.
Translator's Note: Quran: 51:47.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 58:22.
2

155

Hands? Are you proud?1 He (AS) repliet means With My Omnipotence and My
Power.'"
The Compiler of this book says: I have heard on of the Shiite scholars in Naysabur
mentioning that Imams (AS) used to stop at these Word of Allah when mentioning this verse:
What prevented you that you should do obeisance to him whom I created. Then they would
continue with Word of the Mighty and High: "With My Two Hands, are you proud or are you of
the exalted ones?"2 He also said: It is like the statement of a person: "With my sword you are
fighting with me, and with my spear you are attacking me." It is as if the Mighty and High is
saying that "My Bounties have strengthened your pride and insubordination."

1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 38:75.
Translator's Note: Quran: 38:75.
156

Chapter Fourteen: The Commentary of Verse 42 of Chapter 68 Qalam
- On the Day when there shall be a severe affliction, and they shall be
called upon to make obeisance - 3 traditions

1. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad Imran al-Daqqaq, may Allah have mercy on him, said,
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki on the
authority of Bakr on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said that

.
G m GG 3

Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of the Mighty and High: "On
the Day when there shall be a severe affliction." He (AS) replied: "A veil of light will be
revealed. At that time, the Believes shall prostrate themselves, while the backbones of
hypocrites will be twisted tightly preventing them from prostrating."
2. My father, may Allah have mercy on him, that Sad ibn Abd Allah on the authority of
Ibrahim ibn Hashim on the authority of Ibn Fuddal on the authority of Abu Jamiilah on the
authority Muhammad ibn Ali al-Halabi that

2 2 3 E

G m G

.

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said regarding the Word of the Mighty and High: On the
Day when there shall be severe affliction." He replied: "Blessed be the Supreme
[Jabbar]! Then be pointed towards his shin, lifted the clothing which covered it, and
read: "And they shall be called upon the make obeisance, but they shall not be able."1
He then said: "The people will e silenced, fear will enter them, their eyes will look
fixedly, their hearts will reach their throats, their eyes will be in a state of humbleness,
and they will be humiliated when they are called upon to make obeisance, although
they are sound."

1

Translators' Note: Quran: 68:42.
157

Muhammad ibn Ali the Compiler of this book says: What he (AS) meant by his statement
"Blessed be the Supreme!" after which he pointed to his shin and uncovered it," was "Blessed
be the Supreme! He is far above having a shin, Who is such."
3. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid, may Allah have mercy on him, said:
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Nasr on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Musa on
the authority of Ubayd ibn Zurarah that

.
2
I enquired Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High:
"On the Day when there shall be a severe affliction." He (AS) lifted the clothing that
covered his shin, placed his hand on his head, and sailory be to my Lord, the Most
High!"
The Compiler of this book says; The meaning of his (AS) statement "Glory be to my Lord, the
Most High" is that Allah, the Mighty and High, is far Exalted form having human attributes like
a shin.

158

Chapter Fifteen: The Commentary of Verse 35 of Chapter 24 the
Light [al-Nur] - traditions

G >
Allah is the light of the Heavens and Earth; a likeness of His Light is as a niche in which
is a lamp, the lamp is in a glass, (and) the glass is as it were a brightly shinning star, lit
from a blessed olive-tree, neither eastern nor western, the oil whereof almost gives light
through fire touch it not - light upon light - Allah guides to His Light whom He pleases,
and Allah sets forth parables for men, and Allah is cognizant of all Things.
1. My father, may Allah have mercy on him, said: Sad ibn Abd Allah on the authority of
Yaqub ibn Yazid on the authority of al-Abbas ibn Hilal that

H H H G G _ L d

G >
H G7 G G a G G G7

.

I asked al-Rida (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: "Allah is the Light of
the Heavens and the Earth." So he replied (ASe is the Guide of the Inhabitants of
Heaven and the Guide of the Inhabitants of the Earth." While the narration of al-Barqi
states: "He guides whatever is in the Heavens, and He guides whatever is in the Earth."
The Compiler of this book says: The anthropomorphist interpret this verse as He is the Light of
the Heavens and the Earth. If that were correct, how is it possible to find darkness on the
Earth at any time, be it day or night? If Allah was the Light of the Heavens, and the Earth,
according to their interpretation, He would have to be perpetually present, and could not be
non-existent at times. Therefore, when we find the Earth dark at night, and when we find the
inside of the Earth dark (even) during the day, then this indicates that the interpretation of :
"Allah is the Light of heaves, and the Earth," is what al-Rida (AS) has said and not that the
anthropomorphist have given. So, verily, He, the Mighty and High, is the Guide of the
Inhabitants in the Heavens and the Earth, and the Indicator [Mubayyin] for the Inhabitants of
the Heavens and the Earth in their religious and worldly affairs. In the same way that the
inhabitants of the Heavens and the Earth are guided by Allah in their religious affairs, they are
guided by the Light that Allah has created for them in the Heavens and the Earth in their
worldly affairs. This is what He meant when He said that He was the Light of the Heaves and
the Earth. The attribute He applied to Himself is metaphorical since, intellectually - speaking, it
is not logical for Allah, the Mighty and High, to be light or to glow, or to belong to the realm of
lights, for the simple fact that He is the Creator of Light. His Statement also applies to the
verse: "A likeness of His Light." Verily, He intended by it the description of His Light. Evidently,
this Light is other than Him since He anthropomorphized it with the lamp and its glow, as He
mentioned and described in this verse. It is not permissible to anthropomorphize His Being
with the lamp, because there is no likeness and no equivalent to Allah. Therefore, it is correct
to say that His Light, which He anthropomorphized with a lamp, refers to His Guidance. It
refers to the fact that He guides the inhabitants of the Heaves and the Earth towards His
Religion, towards divine Unity, toward His Wisdom, and towards His Justice. After explaining
159

the Clearness of His Guidance and naming it "Light," as He guides with it His Servants to His
Religion and what is in their best interests, He said: A likeness of it is a niche in which is a
lamp, the lamp is in a clear glass that resembles a brightly shining star in its clearness. The
brightly shining star is a star that resembles a pearl in its color. This lamp, which is in a clear
glass, light from a blessed olive oil. He has intended by this Syrian oil, because it is said: It is
blessed for its inhabitants. By "Neither eastern nor western," the Mighty and High means that
this oil is neither eastern, so that he sun does not shine on it at the time of sunset, nor western
so that the sun does not shine on it at the time of sunrise. Rather, it is from the upper part of
the tree and the sun shines on it throughout the day. This is what makes it the best, and
makes its oil light. He then emphasized the clearness of its oil; that "the oil whereof almost
gives light through fire touches it not" to describe its clarity. He explains that the religious
guidance that Allah gives His Servants in the Heavens and the Earth, is clear, and its
explanation, which is the clear glass, is equally clear. The fire ignites the clear oil as He
described. The glow of the fire combines with the glow of glass and the glow of oil in it. This is
the meaning of His Word: "light upon light," and this is what He, the Mighty and High, meant:
"Allah guides to His light whom He pleases." That is, from His Servants who have reached the
age of maturity so that they may recognize by that and be guided through it, and reason with
it, regarding the unity of their Lord, and all religious matters. Allah, the Mighty and High, has
indicated by this verse what He has mentioned of His Clear Indications and Signs with which
He guides His Servants in their religion. In other words, none of them have been left in
ignorance. If any of them neglect their religion, it is not due to vagueness or ambiguity on
behalf of Allah, the Mighty and High, since Allah, the Mighty and High, has explained to them
His Indications and Signs. Verily, they come to make mistake, due to forgetting about Allah's
sings and failing to derive through these signs the existence of Allah, the Mighty and High, and
what is in their best religious interest. He has also explained that He Is All-Knowing when it
comes to the interest of His Servants.
2. It had been related on the authority of

% U
G >

2
G G G G I G > H G O C G H
G G H G!" I G I 3$ G >

.GG _ G GG H G " H G e

al-Sadiq (AS) that he (AS) was asked about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High:
"Allah is the Light of the Heavens and the Earth; a likeness of His Light is as a niche in
which is a lamp." So he (AS) replied: Allah has given an example for us. The Prophet
(SA) and the Imams, may Allah bless them all, are the Signs of Allah through which He
guides people towards Divine Unity, towards His Religion, towards Islamic law, and
towards (religious) obligations and recommendations. There is no power except Allah,
the Most High and Most Great.
3. The confirmation of that is what Ibrahim ibn Harun al-Hiti said in the city of Al-Salam that
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Abu al-Thalj said: al-Husayn ibn Ayyub said, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ghalib, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Husayn, on the authority ibn Ayyub, on
the authority of al-Husayn ibn Sulayman, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Marwan alDhahali, on the authority of al-Fudayl ibn Yasar that
160

H G G H G G2 GG L :

G >

H 2C G m G G G%G 2
G IG L E H E G L H

4 _ G IHd L E G qG G!" G G G E G7 2 G L

E G L _ q % H d G L G

E E 2

% 3 G I L G ~ *
Y G I EqG G C G GG G G
G G E L G%G G G 2 G E H G $ G G G G G k

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "Allah is the Light of the Heavens and the Earth?"
He answered: "Such is Allah, the Mighty and High." He says: I asked: "A likeness of His
Light?" He answered: "Muhammad (SA)." I enquired: "As a niche?" He replied:
"Muhammad (SA) chest." I then asken which is a lamp?" He said: "That of
Prophethood, which contains the Light of Knowledge." I asked: "The lamp is in a
glass?" He answered: "The knowledge of the Messenger of Allah (SA) is preserved in
Ali's heart." I asked: "As if she were?" He asked: "Where did you get As if she were?"
So I said: "May I be your ransom! How should I read it?" He said: "As if it were a
brightly shining star." I then askeit fro a blessed olive-tree, neither eastern nor
western?" He replied: "That is the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS),
who was neither Jewish nor Christian." I asked: "The oil whereof almost gives light
though fire touches it not?" He answered: "The knowledge more or less comes out of
the mouth of the learned from the Progeny of Muhammad (AS) before they even speak."
I askeight upon light?" He said: "An Imam (AS), one after another."
4. Ibrahim ibn Harun al-Hiti said: Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Abu al-Thalj said: Jafar ibn
Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Zuhri said: Ahmad ibn Sabih said: Zarif ibn Nasib said, on the
authority of Isa ibn Rashid,

G IG E G H G%G G 7 G G _ G G G H
IHd C E G G G!" _ G H G E G C E G7 2 G _ G H

E 2

Y E HGI E H G A
d m 2 G G G H E H G $ G G

G!" $ G G E H G $ G E G G G G G GG Z H Z G " G m E

.
161

That Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of the
Mighty and High: As a niche in which is a lamp." He explained: The niche is the
Light of Knowledge contained in the Chest of the Prophet (SA). The lamp is in a
glass; the glass is the chest of Ali (AS). The knowledge of the Prophet (SA) was
transferred to Ali's Chest. The glass is as if it were a brightly shining star, lit from a
blessed olive-tree. He added: Light, neither eastern nor western. He said: "Neither
Jewish nor Christian.' The oil whereof almost gives light though fire touches it not.
He said: "The learned from the Progeny of Muhammad (SA) more or less give
knowledge before they are even asked. Light upon light, meaning an Imam (AS),
endorsed through the light of knowledge and wisdom, one after another, from the
Progeny of Muhammad (SA), and that is from Adam (AS) to the Day of Judgement.
These successors were appointed by Allah, the Mighty and High, as His Caliphs on Earth
and His Proofs for His Creation. The Earth is not free at any time from at least one of them
(AS). The proof of this statement can be found in the words of Abu Talib (AS) regarding the
Messenger of Allah (SA): Muhammad! You are the Trustworthy, the Lord, and the
Magnanimous Master, For the noble, the best, the generous, and the pure in lineage. You
are the Most Auspicious of the fortunate surrounded by the luckiest. Since the time of
Adam there has always been amongst us a divinely-guided successor. I have recognized
you as the truthful in words that is not refuted. You spoke the truth when you were but a
beardless child. He (Abu Talib) says: "You spoke with knowledge as a child, even before
anything was revealed to you. You were like Abraham (AS) who told his people as a youth:
Surely I am clear of what you set up (with Allah); and like Jesus (AS) when he spoke from
his cradle that Surely I am a servant of Allah; He has given me the Book and made me a
prophet; and He has made me blessed wherever I may be. In a similar poem, Abu Talib
(AS) said the following regarding the Messenger of Allah (SA): There is no one like him
among men, master of kinsfolk. If they compare him at the time when he becomes
manifested, Then the Lord of the servants endorsed him by His Light, And made apparent
the righteousness of the religion which will not be short-lived. He (AS) says in it: The fair
faced one for the sake of whom one prays for rain. He is a spring for the orphans, and a
safeguard for the helpless. The perishing children of Hashim circumambulate around him
(to be his ransom), Hence, they are in ease, and excess with him. He is the Balance of
Truth which does not break a promise, even for a grain of barley. And he is a Balance of
Justice whose measurement does not go astray.
5. Ali ibn Abd Allah al-Warraq said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn
Abu al-Khattab said: on the authority of Muhammad ibn Aslam al-Jabali, on the authority of
al-Khattb ibn Umar and Musab ibn Abd Allah al-Kufiyyin, on the authority of Jabir ibn
Yazid, that

G _ G G E G G G
G >

. G _ G H G GG G C G C G7 G 2 G 2 G G%G

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High:
Allah is the light of heavens and the Earth; a likeness of His Light is as a niche.'
He replied: "The niche is the Chest of the Prophet of Allah (SA) in which is the lamp.
The lamp is the knowledge in the glass. The glass is the Commander of the Faithful
(AS) and the knowledge of the Prophet (SA) is with him (AS)."
162

Chapter Sixteen: The Commentary of Verse 67 of Chapter 9 the
Repentance [al-Tawbah] They have forsaken Allah, so He has
forsaken them.- 1 tradtion

1. Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Isam al-Kulayni (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub alKulayni (RA) said: Ali ibn Muhammad, famous as Allan, said: Abu Hamid Imran ibn Musa
ibn Ibrahim on the authority of his brother Abd al-Aziz ibn Muslim that

O ! 2 3

I m O H G" I m

G H 3 H H I Y I G G OG % G Y

3 I G IG G Y H H %

.. G IG G G G G G

I asked Al-Rida Ali ibn Musa (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High, they
hae forsaken Allah, so He has forsaken them.' So He (AS) said: Allah, Blessed and
Exalted be He, neither forgets nor makes mistakes. Indeed, the present creation forgets
and makes mistakes. Have you not heard the Mighty and High say: And your Lord is not
forgetful. Verily, He punishes the one that forgets Him and forgets the meeting of this
Day, and then He makes them to forget themselves. As the Mighty and High says: they
forsook Allah, so He made them forsake their own souls: these it is that are the
transgressors. And the Word of the Mighty and High: So today We forsake them, as
they neglected the meeting of this day of theirs. That is to say "We will abandon them
as they neglected to prepare themselves for this Day of Meeting."
The Compiler of this book says: The statement "He will abandon them" means that "He will not
reward them" on the Day of Judgement because it is not proper for Allah, the Mighty and High,
to abandon. As for the word of Allah the Mighty and High: And left them in utter darkness -
they do not see; it means that He will not hasten their punishment, thus granting them time to
repent.

163

Chapter Seventeen: The Commentary of Verse 67 of Chapter 39 the
Companies [al-Zumar] And the whole Earth shall be in His Grip on
the Day of Resurrection and the Heavens rolled up in his Right Hand.
- 2 traditions

H G G % 2 Z G %
G >

1. Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Isam al-Kulayni (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub alKulayni (RA) said: Ali ibn Muhammad, famous as Allan al-Kulayni, said: Muhammad ibn Isa
ibn Ubayd that

G G % 2 Z G H H G G H n
G E H H G G L d

% H 3 G%G G % IH 2 G ! 2 3 G G G G >

H G >
H G G % 2 Z G H G " G" G G H

G 2 G % Y H H H H E 4 G E G"G G H
.
G m H ! % 2 G G

I asked Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad al-Askari (AS) that the Word of Allah, the
Mighty and High: And the whole Earth shall be in His Grip on the Day of Resurrection
and the Heavens rolled up in His Right Hand.Consequently, he (AS) replied, This is a
condemnation from Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, for those who compare Him to
His Creation. Have you not see that He said: and they do not assign to Allah the
attributes due to Him when they say: Allah has not revealed anything to a mortal,1 then
the Mighty and High eliminated (anthropomorphic elements of) the Grip, and the Right
Side from Himself and, hence, He said: Glory be to Him, and may He be exalted above
what they associate (with Him).2
2. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Haytham Ijli (RA) said: Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakaria Qittan
said: Bakr ibn Abd Allah ibn Habib said: Tamim ibn Buhlul on the authority of his father on the
authority of Abu al-Hasan Abdi on the authority of Sulayman ibn Mihran who that

I G % G G m G G % 2 Z G H H G G G G2 L d

H G H G % G 2 #$
! 2 3 G G 2 %
1
2

Translator's Note Quran: 6:91.
Translator's Note Quran: 39:67.
164

H H % G 2 _ m _ G m G m
3 2 G 2 m H

G I G G I 2 m >

H H m H G G >

.

G m H ! % 2 G%G3H G%G3 G >

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: And
the whole Earth shall be in His Grip on the Day of Resurrection. Thus, he (AS)
answered, This means that no one will grab hold of His Rule but Him. While the Grip [alqabd] from the Blessed and the Exalted in another place is deprival, the amplification
[al-bast] signifies granting and increase. As the Mighty and High has said; And Allah
straitens and amplifies, and you shall be returned to Him.1 This means that He grants,
increases, deprives and tightens. According to one opinion, the straitening [al-qabd] of
the Mighty and High signifies seizure. According to another opinion, the straitening
means His Acceptance. As He says: And he takes the alms2 i.e. He accepts them from
eligible ones, and rewards them for it. I enquired, "As for the Word of the Mighty and
High: The Heavens rolled up in His Right Hand.'3 He (AS) replied, "The Right Hand
signifies strength and power. The Mighty and High says: The Heaves rolled up by His
Omnipotence and Power; glory be to Him, and may He be exalted above what they
associate (with Him.).'4

1

Translator's Note Quran: 2:245.
Translator's Note Quran: 9:104.
3
Translator's Note Quran: 39:67.
4
Translator's Note Quran: 39:67.
2

165

Chapter Eighteen: The Commentary of Verse 15 of Chapter 83 the
Defrauders [al-Mutaffifin] Nay! Most surely they shall on that day be
debarred from their Lord. - 1 tradition

E G G I_ I H G" ^H
The Commander of the Faithful said: "This means that they are deprived of Allah's
Reward and Benevolence."
1. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Yunus Muadhi said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Said Kufi Hamadani said: Ali ibn Hasan ibn Ali ibn Fuddal on the authority of his father said

2 3

E G G I_ I H G" ^H H H G G

.
G I_ G I H G" G m % H G 2G G%G % q G%G C E G

!
I asked Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: Nay!
Most surely they shall on that day be debarred from their Lord. Consequently, he (AS)
replied, "Verily, Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, cannot be confined to space, where
He becomes incarnate and where He could be concealed from His Servants. On the
contrary, He is implying that they are banned from their Lord's reward."

166

Chapter Nineteen: The Commentary of Verse 22 of Chapter 89 the
Daybreak [al-Fajr] And your Lord comes and (also) the angels in
ranks. - 1 tradition

b b
1. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Yunus Muadhi said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Said Kufi Hamadani said: Ali ibn Hasan ibn Ali ibn Fuddal on the authority of his father said

H H H G " b b

_ G G G m H G" G G G G !

I asked Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: And
your Lord comes and (also) the angels in ranks. Consequently, he (AS) replied, Verily,
Allah, the Mighty and High, cannot be characterized by coming and going since He is
far above transferring His Location. Verily, what He is implying by this verse is that
Your Lord's Affair comes in the same sense that the angels come in ranks.

167

Chapter Twenty: The Commentary of Verse 210 of Chapter 2 the Cow
[al-Baqarah] They do not wait aught but that Allah should come to
them in the shadow of clouds along with the angels. 1 tradtion

G O G G E G7 I G 3 d H G "

1. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Yunus Muadhi said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Said Kufi Hamadani said: Ali ibn Hasan ibn Ali ibn Fuddal on the authority of his father that

m GO G G E G7 I G 3d H G "

.L G G E G7 G G O G I G 3d H G "

I asked Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) about the word of Allah, the Mighty and High: They do
not wait aught but that Allah should come to them in the shadow of the clouds along
with the angels. The Imam (AS) sait means that they do not wait aught but that
Allah should send angels to them in the shadow of the clouds along with the angels.
That is how it was revealed."

168

Chapter Twenty-One: Meaning of Scoffing, Mockery, Planning and
Deception of Allah - 1 tradition

n

% G IG G I m % I G k
n

o

The Commentary of Verse 79 of Chapter 9 the Repentance [al-Tawbah], 15 of Chapter 2
the Cow [al-Baqarah], 54 of Chapter 3 the family of Imran [Ali Imran], 142 of Chapter 4
the Women [al-Nisa'] Allah will pay them back their scoffing.1 Allah shall pay them back
their mockery.2 And they planned and Allah (also) planned, and Allah is the best of
planners.3 Hypocrites strive to deceive Allah, and He shall requite their deceit to them.4
1. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Yunus al-Muadhi said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Said al-Kufi al-Hamadani said: Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Fuddal on the authority of his
father that

n

G%G G IG G I m H G G I G k
n
n

m ! 2 3
G I m k
m H ! G mG

n
C G IG H H % H G G
.. Z G2 Z

I asked Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: Allah
will pay them back their scoffing, and about His Word: Allah shall pay them back their
mockery, and about His Word: And they planned and Allah (also) planned, and about
His Word They strive to deceive Allah, and He shall requite their deceit to them.
Consequently, he (AS) replied, "Verily, Allah, the Blessed, does not scoff, mock, plan or
deceive. However, He, the Mighty and High, will punish them for scoffing, mockery,
planning, and deception. Exalted is Allah, the Elevated, and the Great, from the words
of the unjust."

1

Translator's Note Quran: 9:79.
Translator's Note Quran: 2:15.
3
Translator's Note Quran: 3:54.
4
Translator's Note Quran: 4:142.
2

169

Chapter Twenty-Two: Mana Janb Allah The Meaning of Allah's Side -
2 traditions

1. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Jafar alKufi said: Musa ibn Imran al-Nakhai al-Kufi said on the authority of his paternal uncle alHusayn ibn Yazid, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Husayn, on the authority of who related to him,
on the authority of Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir, o the authority of Abu Abd Allah (AS) that

G G H G G Ga G q G G : GG G H G " G G2 G

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) saiam the Knowledge of Allah. I am the
Containing Heart of Allah. I am the Speaking Tongue of Allah. I am the Eye of Allah. I am
the Side of Allah. And I am the Hand of Allah."
The Compiler (RA) of this book says: When Ali (AS) says that I am the Heart of Allah that
contains," he means that "I am the heart that Allah has made a container for His Knowledge
and made obedient to Him." The heart is a creation of Allah, the Mighty and High, in the same
sense that Ali is a servant of Allah, the Mighty and High. One says "the Heart of Allah" [qalb
Allah] in the same way that one says "the Servant of Allah," "the House of Allah," "Allah's
Paradise," and "Allah's Hell." As for Ali's statement that "I am the Eye of Allah," he means that
he is the one who watches over the Religion of Allah. Similarly, the Mighty and High, has said:
Sailing, before our eyes,'1 which means "with Our Observance." The Mighty and High has
also said: And that you might be brought up before My eyes,'2 which means with My
Observance."
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said; al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan ibn
Aban said on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of al-Nadr ibn Suwayb, on
the authority of Ibn Sinan, on the authority of Abu Basir, on the authority of Abu Abd Allah
(AS) that

G G O G I G I G G G2 G

2 G H G!" GG G O GE O _ d G
Y m G H G q G H % G G H G G

1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 54:14.
Translator's Note: Quran: 20:39.
170

H 3/4

G G HGG G2G 2 G G L

G G%G % H G C Ga ~G % H

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) said in one of his sermons: I am the Guide. I am
the Rightly-Guided. I am the Father of the Poor and the Orphans. I am the Husband of
Widows. I am the Refuge of the Weak. I am the Shelter of the Fearful. I am the One who
Leads Believers to Paradise. I am the Firm Rope of Allah. I am the Firmest Handle of
Allah, and I am the Word of Piety. I am the Eye of Allah. I am His Truthful Tongue, and I
am His Hand, I am the Side of Allah who says: Lest a soul should say: O woe to me!
For what I fell short of my duty to Allah.'1 I am the Outspread Hand of Allah towards His
Servants, granting mercy and forgiveness. I am the Door of Divine Mercy. Since I am
the Successor of the Prophet (SA) on His Earth, and His Proof for His People, whoever
recognizes me, and recognizes my right, recognizes His Lord. He who rejects me
rejects Allah and His Messenger (SA). The Compiler (RA) of this book says: In Arabic,
the side [al-janb] literally means obedience. It is said: "this is little in the side of Allah"
which means "this is little in terms of obedience to Allah, the Mighty and High."
Therefore, the meaning of the statement of the Commander of the Faithful (ASam
the Side of Allah" is "I am the one whose guardianship [wilayah] represents obedience
to Allah. Allah, the Mighty and High saiest a soul should say: O woe to me! For
what I fell short of my duty to Allah."2 i.e. in the obedience of Allah, the Mighty and
High.

1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 39:56.
Translator's Note: Quran: 39:56
171

Chapter Twenty-Three: Mana al-Hujzah The Meaning of the
Waistband - 4 traditions

1. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said on the authority of his paternal uncle Muhammad
ibn Abu al-Qasim, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi, on the authority his
father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sinan, on the authority of Abu al-Jarud, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Bishr al-Hamdani that: I heard Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah say

G G G G$ G G G H GG G GH m G H G H L G

G $ E H $ G G G G G

The Command of the Faithful (AS) related to me: "The Messenger of Allah (SA) will take
hold of Allah's Waistband [hujzah]. We will take hold of the Prophet's Waistband, and
our Shiites will take hold of our Waistband." I asked, "O Commander of the Faithful,
what is the Waistband." He answered, "Allah is greater than being characterized with a
waistband or other than that. However, the Messenger of Allah (SA) will take hold of
Allah's Affair [amr]. We will take hold of the Prophet's Affair, and our followers [Shiah]
will take hold of Our Affair."
2. My father (RA) that Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa said on the
authority of al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Khazzaz, that

G $ G G G G$ G G G H G " : _ G G
.

Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) said: "Verily, the Messenger of Allah (SA) will take hold of
Allah's Waistband [hujzah]. We will grab the Prophet's Waistband and our Shiites will
take hold of our Waistband." He then said: "the Waistband is the Light [al-nur]."
3. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: Ali ibn al-Abbas related to me that
al-Hasan ibn Yusuf said on the authority of Abd al-Salam, on the authority of Ammar ibn Abu
al-Yaqzan, that

172

G $ G%_ G G Z G$ G G G G1/4 : G G2 G

G G G Z G$ G G1/4 G G I H G

G G1/43 _ G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: The Messenger of Allah (SA) will take hold of the
Waistband of his Lord on the Day of Judgment. We will take hold of the Prophet's
Waistband, and our Shiites will take hold of our Waistband. We and our Shiites are the
Party of Allah, and the Party of Allah shall be triumphant.1 By Allah, we do not declare it
to be Waistband of the cloth; rather, it is greater than that. The Messenger of Allah will
take hold of Allah's religion [din]. We will take hold of the relgion of our Prophet (SA),
and our Shiites will take hold of our religion.
4. It is transmitted from Al-Sadiq (AS) that he said:

3 I H G G H : % H G G H G
.n
G G G 3 H H G " H
The Prayer [al-Salat] is the Waistband [hujzah] of Allah. In other words, so long as one
performs his prayers, his prayers will prevent him from disobedience. Allah, the Mighty
and High, said: "surely prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and evil."2

1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 5:56.
Translator's Note: Quran 29:45.
173

Chapter Twenty-Four: Mana Ayun, Udhun wa-Lisan Allah The
Meaning of the Eye, the Ear, and the Tongue of Allah - 1 tradition

1. My father (RA) that Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa on the
authority of Husayn ibn Said on the authority of Fudalah ibn Ayyub on the authority of Aban
ibn Uthman on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that

G G%G G G%G G G G I G%G G Z H H H G " m G G 2 L G

H % a
E E G RG H % G G

G G IG Z _ G G IG H G G IG H G IG >
. G G G L G L % H G G%G G 7 G m G IG %

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High created a creation
fro His own Light and a mercy from His Mercy. Hence, they are the Eye through which
Allah sees, the Ear through which Allah listens, and the Tongue through which Allah
speaks His Will. They are the Guardians of His Revelation which He sends down as a
mercy, a warning and a proof. Hence, He wipes out their sins, removes injustice from
them, sends down mercy fro them, gives life to the deceased from them, kills the living
for them, tries His Creation through them, and fulfils the needs of His Creation through
them. I asked, "May I be sacrificed for you! Who are these?" He said: "The successors
[al-Awsiya'] (of Muhammad)."

174

Chapter Twenty-Five: Mana Yad Allah Maghlulah The Meaning of
Allah's Hand is Tied Up - 2 traditions

G 2 G G G IG L H G I GL %
And the Jews say: The hand of Allah is tied up! Their hands shall be shackled and they
shall be cursed for what they say. Nay, both His Hands are spread out. (Quran 5 : 6)
1. My father (RA) that Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Baqi said on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Ali ibn Numan, on the authority of Ishaq ibn
Ammar, on the authority of someone who heard it on the authority of Abu Abd Allah (AS) that

I H G % H m G I GL H H G G G7 : % H G G 2 G % G
G G G IG L H G IG G Z 2G 3 % H G G G

C G L G 2 m m H H
G m
G G 2
. G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah: And the Jews
say: The hand of Allah is tied up!' He said: They do not mean that literally. What they
mean is that "His Command is complete." Therefore, His Bounties do not increase nor
decrease. So Allah, exalted by His glory, demonstrated the error of their view that their
hands shall be shackled and they shall be cursed for what they say. Nay, both His
hands are spread out, He expends as He pleases. Have you not heard Allah, the Mighty
and High say: Allah makes to pass away and establishes what He pleases, and with Him
is the basis of the Book?1
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Mashriqi, on the
authority of Abd Allah ibn Qays that

G G G!" G G > (c)
G % L G 2 m % G : _ G G

Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) said: "Nay, both His Hands are spread out." So I asked him
"Does He have hands like this? And I pointed with my hand to his hand. Consequently,
he replied, "No, for if that were the case, He would have been created."
1

Translator's Note: Quran: 13:39.

175

Chapter Twenty-Six: Mana Ridahu wa-Sakhatuhu The Meaning of
His Pleasure and His Anger - 4 traditions

1. My father (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Ahmad ibn Idris related to me on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa al-Yaqtini, on
the authority of al-Mashriqi, on the authority of Hamzah ibn al-Rabi, on the authority of one he
mentioned that

! 2 3 G G L G % E }

G E} q G G G% G
. _ m 4 CG m H H H G " E G % E 4 G!" E 4 G

I was in the presend of Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) when Amr ibn Ubayd entered and
aked, "May I be your ransom! What is the wrath which is referred to in the Word of
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted: And to whomsoe ver My Wrath is due shall perish
indeed?1 Thus, Abu Jafar (AS) replied. O Amr! That is punishment. Verily, whoever
claims that Allah, the Mighty and High, declines from one thing to another, then he has
certainly given Him an attribute of the created. Verily, nothing instigates Allah, the
Mighty and High, and nothing modifies Him.
2. And with this chain of narrations, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the
authority of his father, who eliminated the source of report2 to Abu Abd Allah (AS) that

d ! 2 3 H G " $
H H G G G7 G G2 G G!" %

d G%G G G % H G

C I % H G G Z G%G G

G m G
Z m G G G G%G G!"

G H H G " Z m H G G Z m I G" G~ G G

G m H G G G q _ > o
G m2

1
2

Translator's Note: Quran: 20:81.
Translator's Note: Such a report is named [marfu] in traditional sciences.

176

_ H G " m GE O G d Y I G H H
G m

G G% G H % G " G H % q H % G " %HG Z G

! G G G G G G G H G _

G (R) E G G G G Z G2 Z G

.
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: Then when they displeased Us, We inflicted retribution on them.1 He (AS) said:
Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is not displeased like our displeasure. However,
He has created Guardians who are displeased and pleased. They are created and
reflect. Thus, He has places His Own Pleasure in their pleasure and His Own Anger in
their displeasure. This is because He has made them Callers to Him and Guides to Him.
That is why they have become like that and it does not reach Allah like it does to His
Creation. Rather, this is the meaning of what He has said. He has also said: "Whoever
disrespects My Guardian, wages war upon Me to which I will respond." He has also
said: Whoever obey the Messenger, he indeed obeys Allah.'2 And He also said: Surely
those who swear allegiance to you do but swear allegiance to Allah.'3 All of this and its
likes are as I mentioned them to you. Such is the case with pleasure and anger and
things that are similar to these two. If displeasure and annoyance were to reach the
Creator, while He brought them about and originated them, it would be permissible to
say: "The Creator will become extinct one day, because if annoyance and anger can
affect Him, then change can affect Him, and if change can affect Him, then He is not
safe from annihilation." If that were the case, then the Creator could not be
distinguished from the created, nor the All-Powerful from the overpowered, not the
Creator from the Created. Exalted is Allah, the Elevated and Great, from this statement.
He is the Creator of All Things, but in need of nothing. Hence, if there is no nee, then a
boundary is impossible, and so is quality. Try to understand this, if Allah wills.
3. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Ali ibn
Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of al-Abbas ibn Amr
al-Fuqaymi, on the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that

G G Y ZOG % ! 2 3 G G G G 2 d Z H
G%G G G q H E G!" E G % G%

G H GC G G%G G G G

G G G G G H G (R) E G!" E G % % _ I % E 4 G G

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 43:55.
Translator's Note: Quran: 4:80.
3
Translator's Note: Quran: 48:10.
2

Z G % H G E 4 G!" G%G G H G C G ! 2 3

.Z G Z Eq2 E G G
A man asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) whether Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
feels pleasure or anger. Thus, he (AS) replied, Yes; however, it is not like the pleasure
or anger found in created beings. Unlike human beings, pleasure and anger do not
change Allah from one emotional state to another. Human beings are operated and
composed. Things can affect human beings, while things cannot affect our Creator. He
is One in Essence and Concept. Thus, His Pleasure is His Reward, and His Anger is His
Punishment, without anything interfering with Him so as to ridicule Him and transform
Him from one sate to another. Emotional changes are an attribute of the crated, the
helpless, and the needy. While He, the Blessed and Exalted, is the Supreme and the
Honorable, who has no need from any of His Creation although all of His Creation is in
need of Him. Verily, He created everything without any need to create or innovate.
4. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said: al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Sakkari said: Muhammad ibn
Zakariyya al-Jawhari said, on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Umrah, on the
authority of his father that

ZOG % H H G G G~G G G % L E H }

.% G % G G q HG G G G Y
I asked al-Sadiq Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS): "O Son of the Messenger of Allah! Inform
me about Allah, the Mighty and High. Does He feel pleasure or anger?" Thus he (AS)
replied, "Yes; however, not in the sense that applied to created beings. When it comes
to Allah, His Anger is His Punishment, and His Pleasure is His Reward."

178

Chapter Twenty-Seven: Mana Nafkhtu Fihi Min Ruhi The Meaning of
Allah's Breathing of Spirit And I breathed into him of My Sprit.1 - 6
traditions

1.Hamzah ibn Muhammad al-Alawi (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Ali ibn Ibrhaim ibn
Hashim reported to us, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on
the authority of Umar ibn Udhaynah, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that

GI G G%G L Y H H G G E} L d
. $ G7 % G G d G G G % H G%G Y G!" %
I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: And
breathed into him of My Spirit. He (AS) replied, "Allah created, chose, selected, and
related the Spirit to Himself, favoring it over all the spirits. Thus, He commanded and
breathed from it into Adam."
2. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa said, on the
authority of Ibn Fuddal, on the authority of al-Halabi and Zurarah, that

G d3 *
Y G%G G C H G" % ! 2 3

Abu Abd Allah (AS) said: "Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is the Alone, the
Needless, without an interior. Verily, the Spirit is a creation from His Creations. It is a
helper, aid, and a source of strength. Allah places it is in the hearts of the messengers
and the Believers."
3. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki that al-Husayn ibn alHasan said: Bakr ibn Salih said, on the authority of al-Qasim ibn Urwah, on the authority of
Abd al-Hamid al-Ta'i, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 15:29.

179

GI G G%G L Y H H G G E} L d

H G % H % H G Z a

G G Z x G G G O % H G G%G Y G!" %
* G >
.. H
G C GG 2 GG G C G E G

I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: And I
breathed into him of My Spirit. What is the meaning of "breathing" in this verse?' Thus,
he (AS) replied, Verily, a spirit moves like the air. Hence, it is called a spirit [ruh],
because its name has been derived from the word air [rih]. Verily, He derived it from the
word al-ruh because the spirit is homogeneous [mujanis] to the air [al-rih]. Verily, He
associated it to Himself because He selected it over all the spirits like He selected that
House from the houses and said: My House, and said for a Messenger from His
Messengers: My Friend, and its like. All of those are created, with a beginning, have
Lord, and re managed.
4. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said, on the authority of
his father, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Umar ibn Udhaynah, on the
authority of Abu Jafar al-Asamm that

G G OG $ G C G E} L d
. OG $
I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) about the spirits that were in Adam (AS) and Isa (AS).
He (AS) replied, "They were two created spirits. Allah chose and selected them as the
spirit of Adam and the spirit of Isa (as).
5. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki that Ali ibn al-Abbas:
Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of Sayf ibn Amirah, on the authority of Au Basir, that

. .G G GI G G%G L Y H G E G G
Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High:
And I breathed into him of My Spirit. He (AS) answered, "That is My power"
6. Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Sinani; al-Husayn ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Hisham al-Mukattab
and Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran (may Allah be pleased with them all) all of
whom said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmai
said; Ali ibn al-Abbas said: Ubyas ibn Hisham said on the authority of Abd al -Karim Amr,
that
180

H G " GI G G%G L Y % H G(R) H H G G2 G
. G%G3 G G I Z G G G L Y GH G L G%G Z H Z
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Might and
High; So when I have made him complete and breathed into him my Spirit.1 He replied,
"Verily Allah, the Mighty and high, created a creation, and created a spirit, then
commanded an angel; hence be breathed into him.

1

Translator's Note: Quran: 15:29.

181

Chapter Twenty-Eight: Nafy al-Makan wa-al-Zaman wa-al-Sukun waal Harakah wa-al-Nuzul wa-al-Suud wa-al-Intiqal an Allah. Negation
of Space, Time, Stillness, Motion, Descending, Ascending, and
Transference from Allah - 22 traditions

{ x
1. My father (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Sa1d ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of
Abu Hamzah al-Thumali that

E G G d : _ G !C G

.Z Z 2G G H Z Z
2

Nafi ibn al-Azraq asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) that Inform me about Allah. Since
when has He existed? Therefore, he (AS) replied to him, "Woe be upon you! Perhaps
you should tell me when He did not exist, so that I can tell you when He did exist. Glory
be to Him, who has always been and will always be, the Peerless, the Needless, who
has taken neither wife nor son."
2. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar (RA) said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the
authority of al-Qasim ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Ali ibn Abu Hamzah, on the authority
of Abu Basir that

E % E} G G!" : E G G

! 2 3 H G "

Z H G Z G%G G E 4

Z H Z % G 2 m Z G 2 Z G

2 Z G Z G E G Z G%G Z G % G G%GO Y G " 2 G G G

G%G G G G G%GO Y G " Z H2 Z G Z G

G%G G G I C 4 % _ E G m G 2 G G I % I G 2 m
182

G m I Z E E E E E

m H 2 C G G

G O
3 % % I H G " G E 4 C E G Z #$
d m G%G G 3 4 G E 4 G >
I 2

H G7 % G d3 E 4 m % m E 4

.H L 3

A man came to Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) and asked him: "O Abu Jafar! Tell me about
your Lord. How long has He existed?" Thus, he (AS) answered, Woe be upon you!
Verily, it is said to a thing that did no exist and then came into being: Since when did it
exist? Verily, my Lord, the Blessed and Exalted, has always been Ever-Living, but not
with quality. There is no time limit for Him. Nor is there any quality for His Existence.
There is neither any space for Him. He is not in a thing or on anything. He has not
created for His Being any space. He is not strengthened after crating anything. Nor was
He weak before creating anything. He was not frightened before He originated anything.
None of the created things are like Him. He was not powerless over the things before
their creation. Nor will He be powerless over them after they have gone. He has always
been Ever-Living without an accidental existence. He was the Omnipotent Sovereign
before creating anything, and He was the Supreme Sovereign after having brought it
into existence. There is no quality for His Essence, nor is there space for Him. He does
not have any limit. He is not recognized by a thing that may be His like. He does not
age. He does not shout to call anything. Nothing frightens Him. All things become
stunned from His Fear. He is Ever-Living, but not a blank living, nor a depicted
existence. He neither has a restricted quality, nor an effect that follows up, nor a place
that adjoins a thing, but He is the Ever-Living who knows everything, and the Sovereign
who always has Omnipotence and Sovereignty. He created what He willed, and He
willed with His Will. He is not limited. He has no parts. And He does not perish. He is the
First without any quality, and the Last without any space. Everything is Command.
Blessed is the Lord of the worlds! Woe be upon you, O questioner! Verily, my Lord
cannot be conceived by imagination. Uncertainties do not befall Him. He does not
adjoin anything, nor does anything adjoin Him. Incidents do not occur to Him. He is not
questioned about anything He does, nor is He places on anything. Slumber does not
seize Him, nor does sleep; to Him belongs whatsoever is in the Heavens, whatsoever is
in the Earth, whatsoever is between them and whatsoever is below the ground.
3. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: li ibn al-Husayn al-Sadabadi said, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Abu Nasr, on the authority of Abu al-Hasan al-Musili that
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
183

GG G % GG G G G!" G2 G G : G G2 G
G G 2 E 2 G G 2 2

L G GG G E _ I % >

. E H G G G 2 H G"

A Jewish rabbi came to the Commander of the Faithful (AS), and asked him: "O
Commander of the Faithful! Since when has your Lord existed?" May your mother
grieve you! When did He not exist so that it may be asked when did He exist? My Lord
preceded the beginning and is without any beginning. He will remain after the end
without an end. There is no end and termination to His Destination. He is separated
from all ends. He is the Utmost of all Ends. Then he asked, "O Commander of the
Faithful! Are you a Prophet?" So he (AS) answered, "Woe be upon you! Verily, I am but
a servant from the servants of Mohammad (SA)." The Compiler (RA) of this book says:
What he (AS) meant was that he was a servant in obedience, and nothing more than
that.
4. And it is narrated that

he (AS) was asked: Where was our Lord before He created the Heaven and the Earth?
Therefore, he (AS) replied, "Where' [ayna] is a question about space, and Allah existed
when there was no space."
5. Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn al-Salt (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ali ibn al-Salt said, on
the authority of his paternal uncle Abu Talib Abd Allah ibn al-Salt, on the authority of Yunus
ibn Abd al-Rahman that

G!" I G G G G!" I G G

% 2

! 2 3

H % GO G%G _ m H H % H G

184

H ! G
2
I 2_ m G G%G2 G%G G O G
.
G m

I asked Abu al-Hasan Musa ibn Jafar (AS): "For what reason did Allah ascend His
Prophet (SA) to the Heavens, from there to the Farthest Lote-Tree [Sidrah], and from
there to the Veils of Light. He addressed him and entrusted a secret to him there. So,
can Allah be described spatially?" Thus, he (AS) replied, Verily, Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, cannot be subjected to space nor can He be subjected to time. However, He,
the Mighty High, intended to honor His angels and the inhabitants of the heavens by
giving them a chance to see the Prophet. He also wanted to show the wonders of His
Sublimity to the Prophet so that he could describe it to his followers after his descent. It
is not at all like the anthropomorphists profess. Glory be to Allah, and Exalted be He,
from what they associate!
6. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn Mutawakkil (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said, on
the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad, on the authority of Amr ibn Uthman, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Khazzaz, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Samaah, that

GG H G "G I G >

L G H E d d G ~G 3 d E d % d

I G" Z E G G 2 2 2 %

. G % H C G H I E _ I % >

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq A(S) said: The head of the rabbis [ras al-jalut] said to the
Jews. "Verily, the Muslims consider Ali to be the greatest debater and the most learned
one among them. Take me to him so that I may ask him a question that will confound
him." Hence, he came to him and asked: "O Commander of the Faithful! Since when
has our Lord existed?" Ali (AS) replied:O Jewish man! It is certainly said: "When did it
exist?" for something that previously did not exist. However, He has always existed,
does exist, and will always exist forever. He has always existed, without quality. O
Jewish man! How2 can He have a beginning? He is prior to the beginning, without a
beginning, end [ghayah], and termination. He is the End and there is no end to Him. He
is the End that is separate from all ends. He is the End of all Ends. Then the Jewish man
saibear witness that your religion is true, and that whatever contradicts it is false."

185

7. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqa (RA) said: Muhhamd ibn Huran al-Suri
said: Ubays Allah ibn Musa Abu Talib al-Rawyani said, on the authority of Abd al-Azim ibn
Abd Allah al-Hasani, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Abu Mahmud that

H G%G G H G G _N

H G!" E H G ! 2 3

H G!" Z G ! 2 3 H G " H G" G G

3d EqG O3 G % G d GE O G G d G H G H G7 G
G (R) H I G G *
G _ H q G G 2G q G % }

H >

. G G _ G G G GH G

I asked al-Rida (AS): "O son of the Messenger of Allah! What do you say about the
tradition which people narrate from the Messenger of Allah (SA) that he said: Verily,
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, comes down from the heaven of this world every
night?'" Thus, he (AS) replied, May the curse of Allah be upon those who alter words
from their place! By Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, sends down an angel from heaven
to this world during the third part of every night, and the first part of Friday night.
Hence, He commands him, so he calls, "Is there any supplicant on whom I can bestow
his wish? Is there anyone who is repenting so that I can forgive him? Is there anyone
seeking forgiveness so that I may forgive him? O seekers of goodness, come! O
seekers of evil, abstain!" He constantly proclaims this till dawn breaks. When dawn
breaks, he return to his place in the realm of heaven. My father related to me this on the
authority of my grandfather from the Messenger of Allah (SA).
8. Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Isam (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub al-Kulayni said:
Ali ibn Muhammad said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sulayman, on the authority
Ismail ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad al-Tamimi, on the authority of alHusayn ibn Ulwan, on the authority of Amr ibn Khalid, on the authority of Zayd ibn Ali (AS)
that

G H G G _ G~G GL % L

G 3 H H G (R) G

G%G G C % G Z G G
% d H G%G d E 4 G7 % G
186

E G G!" H G!" G
H G%_ G!" G G GL L >
H % d H H G%_ G!"

G G!" 2 H % H 3 IG % G G H H G G G Z G

H O
H H 2 G G I H G" m

! E G

o

!~G" G G" G _ G!" G G G G

C G H H G%G OG _ G" L G
e G >
G G G!" G L H G L 2 H G " H G GL G!" C

G I G%G3 G G!" e I G"

>

G G%G3 G7 Z G ! 2 3 H G " H H G

q_ H G m H H m C GO m H H
.. % G H

I asked my father the master of the worshippers [Sayyid al-Abidin] (AS): O father!
Inform me about when our grandfather the Messenger of Allah (SA) ascended to heaven
to meet His Lord, the Mighty and High, and He commanded him to complete fifty daily
prayers. Why did he not ask for any relief for his Ummah, until Musa son of Imran (AS)
said to him to go back to his Lord and ask for relief as your Ummah does not have the
strength for that? Thus, he (AS) answered, O son! Verily, the Messenger of Allah (SA)
was not going to suggest anything to his Lord, the Mighty and High, nor reconsider
anything He had commanded him to so. Therefore, when Musa (AS) asked him to do so,
he had interceded for his Ummah to the Prophet (SA); it did not suffice for him to reject
the intercession of his brother Musa (AS). So he (SA) returned to his Lord, the Mighty
and High, and asked him for relief until He lowered the obligation to five daily prayers.
He says, I then asked: "O father! Then why did he not return to his Lord, the Mighty and
High, and ask Him for relief from five daily prayers?"
He (AS) therefore, replied, O son! He (SA) intended to relieve his Ummah by means of
the word of Allah, the Mighty and High: "Whoever brings a good deed, he shall have ten
like it." Do you not see that when he (SA) descended to the Earth, Jibrail (AS) revealed
to him: "O Muhammad! Verily, your Lord sends you His Greetings, and says: They are
187

five for fifty, My word shall not be changed, nor am I in the least unjust to the servants."
He says: then I asked, "O father! Did Allah, the Exalted, not mention that He cannot be
described in terms of space?" So he (AS) responded, "Of course, exalted is Allah from
that." Therefore, I asked, "Then what is the meaning of the word of Musa(AS) to the
Messenger of Allah (SA): Go back to your Lord?'" Thus, he (AS) replied, The meaning
of this is the same as the Word of Ibrahim (AS): Surely I fly to my Lord; He will guide
me, and the word of Musa (AS): And I hastened on to Thee, my Lord, that Thou might be
pleased, and His Word, the Mighty and High: Therefore fly to Allah. This means
pilgrimage to the House of Allah. O son! Verily, the Kabah is House of Allah; therefore,
whoever makes pilgrimage to the House of Allah ahs endeavored to reach Allah. The
mosque are House of Allah; therefore, whoever proceeds to them has proceeded to
Allah, and endeavored to visit Him. The praying person, so long as he is prayer, is
standing before Allah, Lofty be His Majesty. The people staying in the planes of Arafat
are standing before Allah, the Mighty and High. Verily, for Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, are places in His Heavens, whoever is ascended to them is ascended to Him.
Do you not hear Allah, the Mighty and High, that To Him ascend the angels and the
Spirit, and He, the Mighty and High, says: To Him do ascend the good words: and the
good deeds, lift them up.
9. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar
said: al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan ibn Aban said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Auramah, on
the authority of Ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Salih ibn Hamzah, on the authority of Aban, on
the authority of Asad, on the authority of al-Mufaddal ibn Umar that

E 4 E 4 G E 4 G7

E 4 G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: Whoever claims that Allah is in a thing, from a thing,
or on a thing, has become an infidel. If Allah, the Mighty and High, were on something
then He would have been carried. If He were in something then He would have been
surrounded, and if He were from something then He would have been caused.
10. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Hammad ibn Amr, that

.E 4 E 4 G E 4 G7 H H

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Verily, whoever claims that Allah, the Mighty and
High, is in a thing or from a thing or on a thing ahs uttered a lied."
The Compiler (RA) of this book says: The proof that Allah, the Mighty and High, is not in space
is that space is caused. The proof has already been established that Allah, that the Mighty and
High, is without beginning, and existed prior to the existence of space. It is not permissible to
say that the Self-Sufficient [Ghani] without Beginning [Qadim] may be in need of anything, nor
that He may change from what He has always been. Therefore, it is correct to say that He is
188

not in a place since He has never been subjected to space. The proof for this is (to be found in
the following traditions):
11. What Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said with that Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakariyya alQittan said, on the authority of Bakr ibn Abd Allah ibn Hubayb that Tamim ibn Bahlul said, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Sulayman ibn Hafs al-Marwazi, on the authority
of Sulayman ibn Mihran that

H G " Y E H G }

G G G G G G G!"
G G >

.GG >
I asked Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS), "Is it permissible for you to say: Verily, Allah, the
Mighty and High, is in a place?" Thus, he (AS) replied, "Glory be to Allah, and Exalted
be He, from that! Verily, if He were subjected to space, He would have been caused
since anything that exists in a place is in need of space. Anything that is in need of
space is accidental, because the Eternal has no needs.
12. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said, on the authority of Ali ibn alAbbas, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Rashid, on the authority of Yaqub ibn Jafari, that

m

! 2 3

G G ~ I G H G " E I G H G " E G E G7 C

G G%G % I H G "
.G G2 H G " % G " E E G G G

Abu Ibrahim Musa ibn Jafar (AS) said:Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, was
always without time and space, and He is not like He was. No place is free from Him,
nor is any place occupied by Him, nor des He dissolve in any place. Nowhere is there a
secret counsel between three persons but He is the fourth of them, nor (between) five
but He is the sixth of them, nor less than that nor more but He is with them where so
ever they are. There is no veil between Him and His Creation other than His Creation.
He is Veiled without a Veil, and He is Covered without a Cover. There is no god but He,
the Great, the Exalted.
13. Abu Talib al-Muzaffar ibn Jafar ibn al-Muzaffar al-Alawi al-Samarqandi (RA) said: Jafar
ibn Muhammad ibn Masud said, on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn Masud al189

Ayyashi that al-Husayn ibn Ishkib said: Harun ibn Uqbah al-KhuzaI reported to me, on the
authority of Asad ibn SAid al-NakhaI that Amr ibn Shimr reported to me, on the authority of
Jabir ibn Yazid al-Jufi that

H G G G G 2 E G H
! 2 3

G G ! % G % G ! 2 3
H G " G b G H ! 2 3 d

a
G G H G q G_ G H GG

. G G

Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (AS) said: O Jabir! The people of Syria have slandered
Allah, the Mighty and High, in the most terrible way. They claim that Allah, the Blessed
and exalted, places His Foot on the Dome of the Rock when He ascends to heaven.
Verily, it was but a servant from among the servants of Allah who placed his foot over
the stone; hence, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, commanded us to take it as a place of
prayer. O Jabir! Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has no rival [nazir] or anything
that resembles him. Exalted is He from the attribute of the attributers! He is far above
the imaginations of the imaginers. He is covered from the eyes of the seeing. He does
not decline with the decliners, and does not set with the transitory. There is nothing
whatsoever like unto Him; He is the Alll-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
14. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamdani (RA) said, on the authority of Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn
Hashim, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr that

H m }

Sufyan al-Thawri saw Abu al-Hasan Musa ibn Jafar (AS) when he was a young boy. The
Imam was praying, and people were passing in front of him. Therefore, Sufyan alThawri told him: "Verily, the people who are circumambuling (the Kabah) are passing
in front of you." Thus, he (AS) replied, "The One to whom I pray to is closer to me than
they are."
15. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan and Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq
(RA) both said: Ahmad ibn Yahya said: Bakr ibn Abd Allah ibn Hubayb said: Muhammad ibn
190

Ubayd Allah related to me that Ali ibn al-Hakam said: Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Aswad said, on
the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS), on the authority of his father (AS)

% G G G Z H 3 G G

G $ G HGI G mG G G G
% ! 2 3 2 H ! qG G G

G G G G m G % H G " C G L % H G" G qGG G d m 2

G qG G G%G2G G G d

H _ G H G " % #

H En G G!" G G G G d G H G G G G

GO G G%G3 G G ~G" G G G % H G

>

% G _ G H C Ga % H G H G7 % G G G H G H G L L HG(R) G H

E G 2 G G " I H G
% H G G!" H G IG H G IG G H

G G%G3 G G _ G H G

G 2 C d % H G H G7 G GH _ G G L E

H G% G > E G G!" d G H >

% G _ G H C Ga % H G H G7 % G G G H

H I C E G G H G G G _ G G O G 2

G G % G $ H % C G % G Ge
3d2 G G " G I H H C d % H G H G7 G GH _ G G 2

G H G 3d2 G G "

191

E 2 G

G L 2 L 2 G G G qGG G G G qG

G GH G G G L 2 L 2 G G G qGG G G G qG G G

G G G G G G L 2 L 2 G

I G G G L 2 L 2 G G

I G H G " E I G H G " E G G%G G G G7 % G E H _ G

G7 G G HGI I H G " G G ~
G G7 G G Z G L HG"
H G H % L G H GG

H H G G% 2 H G G%G ! G I G C HG" G G O G7

The Messenger of Allah (SA) had two Jewish friends who believed in Musa, the
Messenger of Allah (AS). They used to come to Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah
(SA) and listen to him. They both had read the Torah, the scriptures of Ibrahim and
Musa (AS), and had knowledge of previous books. When Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, made His Messenger (SA) die, they both came asking for the one vested
authority after him, and said: "Verily, a prophet does not die but he leaves behind a
Caliph who executes all affairs in his Ummah after him, who is the closet to him in
relation from his Household, of great significance and high prestige." Then one of them
asked his companion, "Do you know who is vested with authority after this Prophet
(SA)?" The other one replied, "I do not know him except for the description which I
have found in the Torah that he will bald and pale. Verily, he is the closest of the people
to the Messenger of Allah." Thus, when they both entered medina, and asked about the
Caliph, they were guided to Abu Bakr. When they looked at him they both said: "This is
not our Companion." Then they asked him, "What is your relationship with the
Messenger of Allah (SA)?" He answered, "Verily, I am a man from his family. He was the
husband of my daughter, A'ishah." They both enquired, "Is there any other
relationship?" He responded, "No." They both said: "This is not the relationship. Inform
us, where is your Lord?" He replied, "Above the seven heavens." They responded, "Do
you have anything else to add?" He said: "No" They saiead us to the one who is
more learned than you. For verily, you are not the man we find described in the Torah
who is successor of this Prophet and his Caliph." Abu Bakr became furious as a result
of their statement and got up. Then he guided them to Umar. This was because Abu
Bakr knew that if they confronted Umar, he would surely hit them. Hence, when they
appeared to Umar, they asked, "What is your relationship with this Prophet (SA)?" He
192

answered, "I am from his family, and he was the husband of my daughter Hafsah." They
both asked, "Is there any other relationship?" He responded, "No." They both said:
"This is not the relationship that we seek to establish. It is not the description which we
find the Torah." Then they asked him, "Where is your Lord?" He replied, "Above the
seven heavens." They asked, "Do you have anything else to add?" He said: "No." They
both said: "Take us to the one who is more learned than you."Hence, he guided them to
Ali, may the peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. When they both arrived in his
presence and looked at him, one of them said to his companion, "Verily, he is the man
whom we find described in the Torah. He is the successor of this Prophet (SA), his
Caliph, husband of his daughter, father of the two grandsons [sibtayn] and father of the
Riser [qa'im] who will come with the Truth after him," Then they asked Ali (AS), "O
man! What is your relationship to the Messenger of Allah?" He (AS) replied "He was my
brother. I am his heir, his successor, the first to believe in him, and the husband of his
daughter Fatimah (AS)." They said to him, "This is the closest and most perfect
relationship. This is the description which we find in the Torah." Then they asked him,
"Where is your Lord, the Mighty and High?" Ali, blessings and salutations be upon
him, replied to them, "If the two of you desire, I could inform you about the life of your
Prophet Musa (AS), and if you desire, I could inform you about the life of our Prophet
Muhammad (SA)." They sainform us of the lifetime of our Prophet Musa (AS)."
Ali (AS) responded, Four angels came; an angel from the east, an angel from the West,
an angel from the Heaven, and an angel form (below) the Earth. Then the one from the
east asked the one from the west, "Where have you come from?" He saihave come
form my Lord." The one from the west asked the one from the east, "Where have you
come from?" He replied, "I have come from my Lord." The one who came down from
the Heaven asked the one which came out from the Earth. "Where have you come
from?" He answered, "I have come from my Lord. And the one which came out form the
Earth asked the one which came down form Heaven, "Where have you come from?" He
saihave come from y Lord." This took place during the lifetime of your Prophet
Musa (AS), and as for what was in the lifetime of our Prophet Muhammad (SA), then that
is His word in His Decisive Book: Nowhere is there a secret counsel between three
persons but He is the fourth of them, nor (between) five but He is the sixth of them nor
less than that nor more but He is with them where so ever they are." The two Jewish
men enquired, "Then what has stopped your two companions from putting you in the
place which you deserve? We swear by the One who revealed the Torah to Musa (AS):
Verily, you are the True Caliph. We find your description in our Book, and we read it in
our synagogues. Verily, you are more worth of this affair and more entitled to it than the
one who has snatched it away from you." Ali (AS) replied, "The two of them preceded
themselves and obstructed me. Their accountability is with Allah, the Mighty and High.
They will be stopped and questioned (on the Day of Judgment)."
16. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Farisi Abu Al-Husayn said: Abu Said Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn al-Nasawi said: Abu Nasr Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abd Allah al-Sughadi
said in Marw that Muhammad ibn Yaqub ibn al-Hakam al-Askari and his brother Muadh ibn
Yaqub both said: Muhammad ibn Sinan al-Hanzali said: Abd Allah ibn Asim said: Abd alRahman ibn Qays said, on the authority of Abu Hashim al-Rummani, on the authority of
Zadhan, that

193

G G _ G GG G G G!" G H I %2 G G O En % _ G H G H
E G G ! 2 3 G~G % % d G

G G G G % G I C G ~ *
H GH G G % G L H % U

C 3 d G G I I G 2 m I G I I m H

. G _ x G % H
Salman al-Farisi (may Allah have mercy on him) related the coming of the Catholicos
[al-jathiliq] to Medina with one hundred Christians after the death of the Prophet (SA),
and the questions he asked Abu Bakr, and which he was unable to answer. The
Catholicos was then sent to the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) and
asked him about them; therefore, he answered him. Among the questions he asked him
was: "Inform me about the face [wajh] of the Lord, the Blessed and Exalted." Hence,
Ali (AS) called for some fire and dry wood and then set fire to it. When it blazed, Ali
(AS) asked, "Where is the face of this fire?" The Christian replied, "It has a face from all
sides." Ali (AS) responded, "This fire is supervised and produced yet its face is not
know, while its Creator does not resemble it. And Allah's is the East and the West,
therefore, whither you turn, thither is the Face of Allah. No secret is hidden from our

The Compiler of this book says: The tradition is detailed; we have extracted from it the
required passage.
17. Abu Abd Allah al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ushnani al-Rzai the Judge in Balkh said: Ali
ibn Mihrwayh al-Qazwini said, on the authority of Dawud ibn Sulayman al-Farra', on the
authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS), on the authority of his father, on the authority of his
forefathers on the authority of Ali (AS) that

The Messenger of Allah said: Verily, when Musa ibn Imran whispered to his Lord
saying, "O my Lord, are You far from me so I may shout to You or are You close to me
so I may whisper to You?" Therefore, Allah, Lofty be His Majesty, revealed to him, "I am
194

in the Gathering of whoever remembers Me." So Musa (AS) asked, "O my Lord, in what
state shall I remember you?" Thus, He replied, "O Musa, remember Me in every state."
18. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said, on the authority of Ali ibn alAbbas, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Rashid, on the authority of Yaqub ibn Jafar al-Jafari
that

H G!" G ! 2 3

G o

G % G 2 G 2 G

G7 H G" G G!" G ! 2 3
GG H G G H G " % G" G H G

m

_ C E G E Y G!" % 2 G m H G(R) G ! 2 3 % H G"

E G E G C 3 E % G G G%G3G G7 I

H 3 G_ G C 3 G Y GG G G H
H G (R) E EI E E {
C 3
H G7 2 C G G H .GG H G G
.

Abu Ibrahim Musa ibn Jafar (AS) said: A group of people were mentioned before him
(AS) who claimed that Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, comes down to the Heaven of
this world. He therefore replied, Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, does not come
down, and does not need to come down. Verily, for Him both Close and Far are alike.
What is close is not far from Him, and what is far is not close to Him. He is never in
need, but everything is in need of Him. He is the Almighty. There is no god but He, the
Honorable, the All-Wise. As for the statement of the attributers: "Verily, He, the Blessed
and Exalted, comes down," the only ones who say such a thing are those who describe
Him in terms of decrease and increase. Every moving thing requires something that
moves it or by which it is moved. Thus, they assumed with Allah assumptions; hence,
they were destroyed. So beware of limiting Him or seeing boundaries for Him such as
decrease and increase, motion and decline, or rising and sitting. For, verily, Allah is
loftier than the attribute of the attributers, the description of the describers, and the
imagination of the imaginers! Rely on the Honorable, the Most Merciful, who sees you
when you stand, when you bend, and when you prostrate.
19. And with this chain of narration, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Rashid, on the authority of
Yaqub ibn Jafar, that

195

H C G%G E G C G%G % Gd G O % H G"

E Y G7E C 3 G G G G ! 2 3 G E _ G G C GG

Abu Ibrahim al-Kazim (AS) said: I do not say: Verily, He is definite so I remove Him from
His place, nor do I bound Him to a place that He may be confined to it. Nor do I set Him
a boundary that He may move within something with support or by means of limbs. Nor
do I limit Him with words that are thrust from the mouth. The Blessed and Exalted says:
"Be and it is," by His Will, and without any hesitation in desire, the Peerless, the
Needless. He is not in need of an associate in His Sovereignty, nor an associate to open
the doors of His Knowledge for Him.
20. Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn al-Sinani (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Asadi
al-Kufi said, on the authority of Musa ibn Imran al-NakhaI, on the authority of his paternal
uncle al-Husayn ibn Yazid al-Nawfali, on the authority of Ali ibn Saim, on the authority of Abu
Basir that

H G " : G G H G G2 G

! 2 3

m H ! G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, cannot be
described in terms of space, motion, translocation or stillness. Rather, He is the Creator
of time, space, motion and stillness. Exalted is Allah from what they say, the Elevated,
the Great.
21. Abu al-Husayn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Aza'mi said: Abu Said Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Rumayh al-Nisawi said: Abd al-Aziz ibn Ishaq reported to us that Jafar ibn
Muhammad al-Hasani related to me that Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Khalaf al-Attar said: Bishr
ibn al-Hasan al-Muradi said, on the authority of Abd al-Quddus who is the son of Hubayb, on
the authority of Abu Ishaq al-SabI, on the authority of al-Harith al-Awar that

H G q G H m I G%_ E G G (R)
A

G 2
H G q G H G H I G

H G " C G > d GG G G 2

GG G L H I % H G

. _ G G L H G" G G L H
196

Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) entered the market. A man had his back turned towards him and
was saying, "No, I swear by the One Hidden over the seven heavens." Consequently,
Ali (AS) tapped him on his back, and asked him: "Who is hidden over the seven
heavens?" He replied, "Allah, O Commander of the Faithful!" He (AS) responded, "You
are wrong. May your mother grieve you! Verily, there is no veil between Allah, the
Mighty and High, and His Creation, because He is with them wherever they may be." He
asked, "What is the penalty of what I have said: O Commander of the Faithful?" He (AS)
replied, "That you should know that Allah is with you wherever you are" He asked:
"Should I feed the poor?" Imam Ali (AS) replied, "No, for verily, you have sworn by
other than your Lord."
22. Abu al-Husayn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Farisi said: Abu Said al-Rumayhi
related to me that Abd al-Aziz ibn Ishaq reported to us that Muhammad ibn Muni slave of
Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) reported to me that my Master Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) related
to me, on the authority of his father (AS), on the authority of his grandfather (AS) that

Y H G%GO I G% H m EqG G G _ G

G G G G H L I G %
. % G G G H G!"
A man passed in front of al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) while he was praying and
one of the people in his gathering stopped him. When he (AS) finished his prayer, he
asked the man: "Why did you stop him?" He answered: "O son of the Messenger of
Allah! He passed between you and the prayer niche [mihrab]." Thus, he (AS) replied,
"Woe unto you! Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, is closer to me from anyone passing
between me and Him."

197

Chapter Twenty-Nine: Asma' Allah taala wa-al-Farq bayn Maaniha
wa bayn Maani Asma' al-Makhluqin The Names of Allah, the Exalted,
and the Difference between their Meanings and the Meaning of the
Names of Creation - 14 tradtions

1. Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Majilwayh (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn
Hashim said, on the authority of al-Mukhtar ibn Muhammad ibn al-Mukhtar al-Hamdani said,
on the authority of al-Fath ibn Yazid al-Jurjani, that

G G H H G G 2 G

G m

m
G C _ G _ G G Z % .

G" % d Y H % H G % H G G (R) G G G G G
% G 2 m L H L H G G G L Z % G 2 m 4 % I G 2 m
G 7 % G H H G" H L H G GLI G Y G G Z
% H H G(R) G G G "
Y G H G H G I G G G G7 H d G~

E G G % G H G E G G % Y Y G G G G H

% 2 G%G % G%G % G L H

G7 G % H G7 G G G G7 G Y G G GO G G%G

H G L G L G 4 G G G % H H G E G E

G G % H ~G(R) G > 3/4

H G! 3/4

3

G H H G" G! G qGC
G 2 H G G!" H H
G G _ G G G G H G G7

198

G o
G 2
G G G G 2 m % G H G I G G G G
_ G G G G H GG G U

>

I G E IG I G G G G7 G G 2 G G7 H G % G m G G

G d3 H I G " G I Y I G%G I m

G G G H G G % G 3 3 I G G G %G

G H G E 4 G E 4 _ G H E $ E E G G H G
. E 4 G

I heard Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) say: He is the Subtle, the All-Aware, the All-Hearing,
the All-Seeing, the One, the Unique, the Needless, who begets not nor is begotten, and
there is none like unto Him. He is the Producer of all Things, the Former of Bodies, and
the Maker of Images. If He was as they say, then the Creator would not be distinguished
from the created, nor the Producer from the production. However, He is the Producer.
The difference between Him and bodes and images I that he created them, and there is
nothing like unto Him.
I asked, "By all means. May Allah make me your ransom! However, you said: The
Alone, the Needless' and you also said: He is not like anything.' If Allah is One, and
man is one, are they not similar in unity?" He (AS) replied, O Fath! You paid attention,
may Allah secure you! Verily, the similarity is limited to meaning. Identifiers are merely
means of identifying the identified. If it is said that there is one man, it means that there
is one body, as opposed to two. However, although we say that man is one, he is not
truly one, as he has different body parts and different colors. Although we say that he is
one, he is composed of many different parts which are not he same. His blood is other
than his flesh, his flesh is other than his blood, his nerves are other than his veins, his
hair is other than his skin, and the darkness of his skin is other than the paleness of his
skin. Likewise is the rest of creation. Thus, the human being is "one" in name, but he is
other than "one" in meaning. Not only is Allah, lofty be His Majesty, One in name, He is
also One in meaning as there is none other than Him. There is no variation in Him, no
contrast, nor any increase or decrease. As a crated being, the human being is
composed of different parts and substances. H e is one "one" in combination. I
enquired: "You have relieved me. May Allah relieve you! As for your statement: The
Subtle, All-Aware,' could you explain it to me as you explained to me the meaning of
the One.' I really need to know how His Subtlety is different from the subtlety of His
Creation. I would surely appreciate it if you could explain that to me." Therefore, he
(AS) answered: O Fath! We had said: He is the Subtle due to the delicate nature of His
Creation, and for His Knowledge of tiny things. Do you not see, may Allah help you and
secure you, the effect of His Making in soft and hard plants? And do you not see in the
delicate creation of tiny insects like the mosquito, the gnat, and that which is smaller
than these two, and are almost not evident to the (naked) eyes? In fact, due to their
small size, it is virtually impossible to differentiate between the male and the female,
and between the young and the old. Thus, we come to know that the Creator is Subtle
199

in His Creation when we see the smallness of creatures in their refinement, their
guidance out of decay, and their fleeing from death. We come to know that the Creator
is Subtle when we contemplate the creatures found teeming in the depths of the ocean,
on the branches of trees, and in the deserts and barren lands. We come to know the
Creator is Subtle when we contemplate how species communicate with one another
using various forms of communication, permitting them to communicate with their
offspring. We come to know that the Creator is Subtle when we contemplate how
creatures provide food to their offspring, and how they are distinguished by colors, red
with yellow, white with red, and with what we can barely see with our eyes due to its
small size. We come to know that the Creator is Subtle when we contemplate the
creatures that our eyes cannot see and our hands cannot touch. He created the world in
subtlety without planning, without instruments, and without tools. Verily, the founder of
anything founded it on the basis of another. However, Allah, the Creator, the Subtle,
and the Sublime, created everything out of nothing.
2. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub alKulayni said: Ali ibn Muhammad, said, on the authority Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority
of al-Husayn ibn Khalid that

G GLH G G G ! 2 3 H H : %H _ G G
2 4 % H G _ G G G H G G (R)G
G G7 % 4 % 2 4 % H

% 2
O G7 G 4 G

4 % 2

! 2 3 % Y

H G~H G H G Z G

Z G O Z G Z G Z G % Y H I G G!" H 2 I G"

G%GO G G H G G % 2 Z G Z G Z G Z G Z G2 Z G Z G Z G
G G G 4 % G 4 %H G G _ G

H Z G G G7 H G (R) IG G G H G%GO G7

! 2 3 H G " I G 2_ H G" E

H G G G G G G G~
G G G%GO G Z 2G

G m G I H G%G q G H G O

200

G C n
G q G NH G m H G G G7 Z H

Y G H G I L G L GH I

G%G G E G E GG G G G G
% G m G G A
H G G%G G H G G%G G G%G G G G HGH G G

H Z I % 2 G" E G E G G G G G C H G" G H Z G GZ

G 2 > H G%G m G%G G Z G C a

_ _ > G% x % H %H G H Y G%G Y G H

G 2 H *
2

G O

G % H G G O %H G GL E 2 G7 E E G

G O Ga2

G H G ^ G7 Z m G O L 2 G E Y _ G O G dG G O
G E G O H G G O G%G
G E G dG G NH G G G G G G Z m

G G G G G7G H G G E G E E H G

>

H E G ! 2 3
I % G Z _ Z _ q H

G H G _ H G H E G

G G G2G G G G G H G 4 % 3 m 4

G H G G2 G Z G2 GZ

E G %H G G GH H

201

G ~ I Gc > I G H G I G%G3 G G%G G G GI G G G G E C

I I G2 G G G aG

% HG" ! G G I E G C d _G _ % H 4 G% x
G G _ G G%G G G2 H G GH G m G G$ G G L I H 3
% G G G IG m dG G G G 2G G G 2 H
_ G L G % 3H G m % G G O G Z G 3 Z G Z G G G G%G 2G

E G % H G(R) G H

I Z I 2G I m En E E G Eq Y
m G Z G m I G

G G G H G G C C G%G G 2 G H ! 2 3 G G G G Z I
L % 3o

H G G % m %H E 1/2
% G k
G" G G2G G G x I H I _ Y H G " G G

. G G 3 G G " G7

Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) said: May Allah bestow upon you knowledge of what is good!
Know that Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is Eternal. Eternity is an attribute through
which the wise understand that there was nothing before Him in eternity, and that there
is nothing alongside Him in eternity. Even the common folk acknowledge that nothing
existed before Allah, and that nothing exists alongside Him. At the same time, it
invalidates the claim that there was something before Him. Had there been something
eternal along with Him. He would not have been the Creator of that thing. If something
existed along with Him, how then would He have been its Creator? Had there been
something existing before Him, then that thing would have been worthier of being His
Creator because it existed before Him. The blessed and Exalted ascribed certain names
to Himself. When He created his creatures, He enabled them to serve Him, and told His
creatures to call Him by those names. He called Himself the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing,
the All-Powerful, the Riser ]qaim], the Manifest, the Hidden, the Subtle, the All-Aware,
the Powerful, the Honorable, the All-Wise, and the All-Knowing, among other similar
names. When the lying exaggerators [ghalun] heard us talk about such names, that
there is nothing similar to Him, and that none of the creatures are like unto Him, they
said: "When you say that there is nothing like unto Him, and nothing is similar to Him,
then how can you share with Him His Most Beautiful Names, and apply them to
yourselves? Thus, this is proof that you are similar to Him in all conditions or in some
conditions because you share the same purified names." It is said to them: Verily,
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has named His Servants with some of His own Names
202

but with differences in meaning just like one name may have two different meanings.
The proof of this can be found among he common people. This is the way in which
Allah, the Mighty and High, has addressed the creation. He has spoken to them by
means of things that they understand so that the will have no excuse for their
misdeeds. A man is sometimes called a dog, a donkey, a bull or a lion just like he can
be called sweet or bitter. All of these words are used with a n allegorical meaning which
differs from their literal meaning. A man cannot literally be a lion or a dog. Please pay
close attention to this, May Allah have mercy on you! Verily, we say that Allah is AllKnowing, and not that He crated knowledge. It does not mean that He uses his
Knowledge in order to record His Future Commands or His Process of Creation and
Destruction because had that knowledge not been present that would imply ignorance
or weakness. Likewise, the learned among creation are called knowledgeable because
they possess created knowledge, which they did not have at some time in the past.
They may lose their knowledge at some point and become ignorant again. However,
Allah is called All-Knowing because He is not ignorant of anything. Thus, the Creator
and the created are both called knowing, but the meaning is different as you have
noticed.Our Lord is called All-Hearing. However, this is not through a body part or
sensory organ without which He could not hear the sound as is the case with us. We
cannot see with the part with which we hear. However, He has told us that no sound is
hidden from Him. His hearing is not limited, as it is in our case. Here again the name
hearing is used in both cases, but its meaning is different. The same applies for seeing.
He does not see by means of an eye as we do. We see using a body part which serves
that sole purpose. However, Allah is All-Seeing, and is never unaware of any individual.
Again, the same name is used in both cases, but its meaning is different. He is
Standing, but not in the sense of standing of His Les as would be the case for other
beings. However, He informed us that He is Sanding, and that He is the Guardian. This
is like the saying "A man is standing behind our affairs." He is Standing behind every
soul watching what is gains. As used by people, the word "standing" also has
meanings like sufficing.' As you may say to a man, "Stand up for the affairs of so and
so" which means to deal with them in a sufficient manner. Standing for us means that
we stand on our legs. Therefore, the name is similar but its meaning is different. As for
the term Subtle, it is Subtle, it is not used in the sense of smallness or being
infinitesimal. Rather, it is used to express how difficult it is to perceive things. As an
example, it may be sait has become very delicate for me," and that "so and so is
very delicate in his manners and dealings." This means that it is profound for the
intellect, and it is very difficult to understand. It has become so delicate that it cannot
even be perceived by means of the imagination. Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is far
more Subtle than to be comprehended through definitions or be limited by an attribute
in the way we are subtle, small and delicate. Names can be the same but they can differ
in meaning. As for the All-Aware, it means that He is the One who Knows all Things,
Completely, but not through study or experience, without which He would know
nothing. One without experience and training is ignorant. Allah is always All-Aware of
what He ha created. The people who are well are those people who are learning to
overcome their ignorance. Thus, names are the same but again, they differ in meaning.
As for the Manifest, it does not mean that He is over and above all things or sitting on
the uppermost part of them. Rather, it refers to His Dominion and His Power over All
Things. An example of this would be when a person says, "I overcame my enemies" or
that "Allah granted me victory over my enemies." In this case, there is a report of failure
and victory. Thus, this shows Allah's Dominion over all enemies.Another illustration
that He is Manifest is that for those who intend Him, nothing is hidden form Him, and He
is the Planner of all that can be seen. What can be clearer or more manifest than Allah,
the Exalted? No matter where you look, His Presence will never vanish. Even within
203

you, His Traces are sufficient proof for His Existence. However, what is manifested in
us is apparent, and its limits are known. Therefore, the names are thee same, but their
meanings differ. As for the Hidden, it does not mean that He is inside things. Rather, it
refers to His Inner Knowledge of all things from their planning to their preserving. As
one may say, "I tried to get to the inside of the matter," that is, "I came to learn and
discover his secrets." For us, what is hidden is what is unseen and covered. Once
again, the names are the same, but they differ in meaning. As for the Subduer, it does
not refer to plotting, using certain devices, speaking seductive words, or using cunning
means as some people do to subdue one another. The victorious among the people
may become subdued, and vice versa. However, for Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,, all
creatures are weak. Due to the absence of obstacles in what He wills for them, it takes
less than a blinking of the eye for Him to say "Be and it is." Subduing in our case is
how I mentioned and explained. Thus, names are alike but their meanings differ. That is
the case for all the names, although we have not mentioned all of them. We will suffice
with this for learning purpose. May Allah be our Helper and your Helper assuring our
guidance and success!
3. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub
said: Ali ibn Muhammad said, on the authority of Salih ibn Abu Hammad, on the authority of
al-Husayn ibn Yazid, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Abu Hamzah, on the authority of
Ibrahim ibn Umar that

>

G Z ! 2 3

E G%G H G E H G
% G x E 2 G

Z E G Z H 3 Z G % E E _ _ GC %
% H 2

G I G Z G q I G" G G G

H > G I GH G H G G G I G
E _G % 2 k
H ! 2 3 G
I G" Z Z G Z G I G E _G H Z G E G G G
G ... G H H
.. G d3 C C ... _ G2 G ...

H ... G2 G
G G G C G .. _ H2 G ... G .. G 2 G

G 2 L

G G H G2 G G2 G I G

G G I G 2 G Y G Z _ G E OG H G 3 H G G

G H G G G I G G G G G G G G q

. % 3 b

204

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, created
names by letters and He, the Mighty and High, cannot be described by letters. He
cannot be uttered by words, cannot be embodied in person, cannot be described by
anthropomorphism, and cannot be colored by colors. Regions are negated from Him.
Limits are far from Him. The sense of every imaginer is covered from Him. He is
understood and not hidden. Hence, He has made it a complete word in four parts
altogether. Neither one of them precedes the other. Then he showed three of those
names to creation out of their need for them, and hid one of them. That is the well-kept
treasured name through which these names were manifested. Thus, the apparent is
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted. He, glory be to Him, utilized each one of the four first
principles, and that became twelve principles. Then He created for each of the
principles thirty names, in effect, related to them. They are the Most Compassionate,
the most Merciful, the Sovereign, the Most Holy, the Creator, the Maker [al-Bari'], the
Imager, the Ever-Living, the Self-Subsistent [al-Qayyum], slumber seized Him not, nor
does sleep, the All-Knowing, the All-Aware, the All-Hearing, the all-Seeing, the Most
Wise, the Honorable, the Supreme, the Possessor of all Greatness [al-Mutakabbir], the
Most High, the Most Great, the All-Powerful [al-Muqtadir], the Omnipotent, the Giver of
Peace [al-Salam], the Granter of Security [al-Mumum], the Guardian over All [alMuhaymin], the Maker, the Producer, the Originator [al-Badi'], the Lofty [al-Rafi]. The
Sublime, Generous, the Sustainer, the Giver of Life, the Causer of Death, the Raiser [alBaith], and the Inheritor. These are the names, among which are the Most Beautiful
Names, until 360 names are complete. Thus, these are related to the three names.
These three names are the first principles, and concealment for the Well-Kept
Treasured name by these three names. As we read in the Word of the Mighty and High:
Say, call upon Allah or call upon the Most Compassionate Allah; whichever you call
upon, He has the best names.
4. My father (RA) said: Ahmad ibn Idris said, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Ubayd Allah,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abd Allah; Musa ibn Amr and al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Abu
Uthman, on the authority of Ibn Sinan that

I m L Y 2 G%G G Z G

G % 3 % Y % Y I G q I d m % H G G G!" Z

H d m G%G G G " %HG I G G G G Z G%G G GG % Y a
_ m
G % H G G%GO H G C G % I _ G % H G G C G G%G G
.E 4 H

I asked Abu al-Hasan al-Rid (AS), "Did Allah know Himself before He created the
creation?" He (AS) replied, "Of course." I asked, "Did He see Himself, and hear
Himself?" He said: Allah was not required to do so because He did not ask Himself
anything or demand anything from Himself. He is Himself, and His Self is He. His Power
was effective and He did not need to call Himself. However, He chose names for Himself
205

so that He could be called upon, because unless He is called upon by His Name, there
is no way for Him to be known. Therefore, the first name He chose for Himself was the
Most High, the Most Great [al-Ali al-Azim], because He is Higher than all things.
Hence, His meaning is Allah, and His Name is the Most High, the Most Great. That is
among His first names, because He is High, Higher than Everything.
5. And with this chain of narration, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sinan that

E G G G G G % d
.
I asked him (AS) "What is a name?" He sait is an attribute for the attributed."
6. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail, on the authority of some of our scholars,
on the authority of Bkar ibn Salih, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn Muhammad, on the
authority of Khalid ibn Yazid, on the authority of Abd al-Ala that

I E 4 G% E 4 C G G : G G2 G

G!" G G G G % H b E G

G G H Z G I G L H G " E

G H G G I E GG E G

E 4 G G G 4 G G G G m H G" % G m
. G%GO G%GO dG H m

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: Allah's name is other than Him. The identifier is
other than the identified, and is thus created, with the exception of Allah. Anything
which is uttered by tongues or written by hands is created. Allah is the destination of all
those who seek to reach Him. The aimer is other than the aimed. The aimed is
described, and everything which is described is created. The Creator of All Things is
not described with the limit of the named. He is not formed so that His Form could be
compared to the created. Anything which is intended is other than Him. He is never
disregarded by whoever understands this conclusion and that is pure Tawhid. Thus,
listen to Allah, accept Him, and try to understand Him with His permission. Whoever
claims that he has recognized Allah through concealing or revealing an image or the
like, is a polytheist, because anything concealed or revealed is other than Him.
Verily, He is One United Being. Therefore, how can one profess a belief in Divine Unity
when one recognizes Him by other than Him? Only he has recognized Allah who
206

recognizes Him by Allah (Himself). Thus, whoever does not recognize Him by Himself
has not recognized Him, and certainly has recognized other than Him. There is nothing
between the Creator and the created. Therefore, Allah is the creator of all things and is
not from a thing. He is named by His Names and, hence, He is other than His Names,
and the names are other than Him.
7. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Bishr related to me, on the authority of Abu Hashim alJafari that

G % ! 2 3 H_ G G~G % d G~H }
E E G I L G " G I G I G H G " }

_ G G 3 L G " G !
G 3 H G (R) >

G G G L G " IC G G%G G G7 G 3

% 2 m I G
H G%G % Z G I H
A
4 %

>
>

o
o

m _
G G H I G C G G~
G 3 d
G H G" G OG G G G%G
_ G _ G G G H G G%G3 G7 G %H G G G
G 3

E _ C G GH G G H
I G G H G G E H

L Y H G" G G G L G G G L 4 G m % H > H G
G G I C G (R) G I L I G G G
H G % G Y G G G% x % H G Z G C a

GG E E G G G G% x % H G Z G H G

H G G%G G G Z G H G G G G G % G Y

2 G G

I G Y E IG G I G" I G Y G G

G I G H G GG G G GG G 2 G G7 G G!" H H

G G 2 G H G Z G C a

207

G G 2

C _ _ % G H G G

H G GH % % 2 G ! 2 3 C

G H % _ 3 G G O H H 3 G % _ 3

.Z G2 Z G ! >

I was with Abu Jafar the Second (AS), when a man asked him, "Inform me about the
Lord, the Blessed and Exalted. There are names and attributes for Him in His Book. Are
those His Only Names and attributes?" Consequently, Abu Jafar (AS) replied, Verily,
there are two interpretations to your question. If you are referring to quantity, then
Exalted is Allah from such limitations. However, if you wanted to know whether these
attributes and names have always existed, then there are two possibilities. Either they
have always been part of His Knowledge, and He has always deserved them, and this is
true. However, if you want to now whether the image of these attributes and names,
their alphabets, and their form, have always been there, then may Allah save me from
the claim that something has existed alongside Him.
In fact, Allah existed when no creation existed. Then He created the names as a means
for His Creation to beseech Him and serve Him. They are the means through which He
is remembered. Allah was there when no remembrance existed. The One who is
Remembered is Allah, the Eternal, who has always existed. The Names and Attributes
are creation of meanings. What is meant by them is that Allah is not subject to
agreement or disagreement, since only one with parts disagrees or agrees. Hence, it is
not said: Allah agreed, nor that Allah is more or less. However, He is Eternal in His
Essence, because whatever is other than One has parts, and Allah is the One without
Parts. He cannot be imagines as less, nor can he be imagines as more. Anything
composed of parts, and which can be conceived as less or conceived as more, was
created by a Creator Thus, when you say that "Verily, Allah is Omnipotent" you are
affirming that nothing incapacitates Him. Therefore, you have negate the word:
"incapable," and applied it to other than Him. Likewise, by your use of the word: "AllKnowing" you have indeed negated ignorance and related ignorance to other than Him.
When Allah causes all things to perish, He will cause images and alphabets to perish.
Nevertheless, He, who has always been All-Knowing, will never expire or decline. The
man asked, "How can our Lord be called the All-Hearing?" He (AS) answered, That is
because nothing which is understood by means of hearing is hidden form Him. We do
not claim that He hears through ears. Likewise, when we call Him All-Seeing, we say so
because nothing visual is hidden from Him: be it colors, people, or other objects. We do
not claim that He sees through eyes. We call Him the Subtle One due to His knowledge
of subtle things like the mosquito, and for His Knowledge of creatures which are even
smaller than that. We call Him the subtle One because of His Knowledge of the place of
their division, their thoughts, their needs, their reproductive cycle, their affection for
offspring, their means of communication, their bringing of food and drink to their
offspring in the mountains, deserts, valleys, and wastelands (of the worlds). We come
to know that the Creator of these things is the Subtle One without quality. Verily, quality
applies only to the created. Our Lord is called the Powerful One, but not with the same
type of power found among created beings. If His Power were like the power found
among created beings, then He would be compared to His Creation, and He would be
susceptible to both increase and decrease and could not be Eternal. Whatever is not
eternal is powerless. Thus, our Lord, the Blessed and Exalted, has no compeer [shibh],
208

no opponent, no equal, no quality, no end, and no regions. The mind is incapable of
conceiving Him, the imagination is incapable of limiting Him, and the conscience is
incapable of placing conditions on Him. He is Higher than the implements of His
Creation and characteristics of His Creatures. Exalted is He, the Elevated and Great,
from such things!
8. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said: Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakariyya al-Qittan said: Bakr ibn
Abd Allah ibn Hubayb said: Tamim ibn Buhul said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Abu al-Hasan ibn al-Abdi, on the authority of Sulayman ibn Mihran, on the
authority of al-Sadiq Jafar ibn Muhammad on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn Ali,
on the authority of his father Ali ibn al-Husayn, on the authority of his father al-Husayn ibn
Ali, on the authority of his father Ali ibn Abu Talib, salutations of Allah be upon them all, that

E G G G H G%G E H G }
G G G H G I G G G_ 2 G G G%G
H G " G EqG G G _ G G%G E G G G G%G G G _ G G%G
G % G G I H Z G H G " Z OG Z G G Z G ! 2 3

G 2 GH o

G2 G2 Ga2 C G G G G 2 G

HH G H G H H x G q

H 2

1/2

n
G G2 G H ! G >

H C 3 A

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has NinetyNine names: one less than a hundred. Whoever enumerates them will enter Paradise.
They are: Allah, God, the One, the Unique, the Needless, the First, the Last, the AllHearing, the All-Seeing, the Omnipotent, the Subduer, the Most High, the Most Sublime,
the Ever-Remaining [al-Baqi], the Originator, the Maker, the Most Generous, the
Manifested, the Hidden, the Ever-Living, the All-Wise, the All-Knowing, the Forbearing
[al-Halim], the Protector [al-Hafiz], the Truth, the Reckoner [al-Hasib], the Praiseworthy
[al-Hamid], the Most Gracious [al-Hafi], the Lord, the Compassionate, the Most Merciful,
the One that sows [al-Dhari'], the Sustainer, the Watcher [al-Raqib], the Affectionate [alRa'uf], the Obserer [al-Ra'i], the Giver of Peace, the Granter of Security, the Guardian
over all the Honorable, the Supreme, the Possessor of every greatness, the Master, the
Most Praised [al-Subbuh], the Witness [al-Shahid], the Most Truthful, the Creator, the
Pure, the Just, the Pardoning, the Forgiving, the Self-Sufficient,the Aid (al-Ghiyah), the
209

Cleaver [al-Fatir], the Peerless, the Opener [al-Fattah], the Splitter [al-Faliq], the Eternal,
the Sovereign, the Most Holy, the Powerful, the Near, the Self-Subsistent, the Seizer (of
souls0 [Qabid], the Extender, the Provider of Needs, the All-Glorious [al-Majid], the
Lord, the Granter [al-Mannan], the One that encompasses everything [al-Muhit], the
Clear [Mubin], the Nourisher [al-Muqit], the Imager, the Generous, the Great, the
Sufficient [al-Kafi], the Remover of harms [Kashif al-dur], the Singly [al-Watr], the Light,
the Bestower [al-Wahhab], the Helper, the All-Embracing [al-Was],, the Loving One [alWadud], the Guide, the Reliable [al-Wafi], the Custodian [al-Wakil], the Inheritor, the
Righteous [al-Birr], the Raiser, the Oft-Returning (in mercy) [al-Tawwab], the Sublime
[al-Jalil], the Generous, the All-Aware, the Creator, the Best of the Helpers, the
Rewarder [al-Dayyan], the Thankful [al-Shakur], the Most Great, the Subtle, the Cure [alShafi].
9. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamdani (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Ali ibn
Ibrahim ibn Hashim said on the authority of his father, on the authority of Abu al-Salt Abd alSalam ibn Salih al-Harawi, on the authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS), on the authority of
his father (AS), on the authority of his forefathers (AS), on the authority of Ali (AS) that

. H %

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "For Allah, the Mighty and High, are Ninety-Nine
Names. Whoever calls Allah by them, He will grant him what he asks. And whoever
enumerates them shall enter Paradise."
Muhammad ibn Ali al-Husayn, the Compiler of this book explains: The meaning of the
statement of the Prophet, praise and salutations of Allah be upon him and his Progeny, is that
indeed Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, the has Ninety-Nine names. Whoever enumerates
them will enter Paradise. Enumerating the names means to encompass them, and understand
their meanings. The meaning of enumerating them is not simply to count them or to number
them. All success depends upon Allah.
Allah, God [Allah, al-Ilah], Allah and Ilah means the worthy of service, and no one has the right
to be served but Him. You may say: He was One God in the sense that He had the right to be
served. This is why, when the infidels went astray, and determined that the worshipping idols
is mandatory, they names them gods [al-ihah]. Its origin is al-ilahah, that is service (worship). It
is said: Its origin is al-ilah, it si said; aliha al-rajul ya'lahu ilayh i.e. he took refuge to it fro an
affair that afflicted him. Alihahu i.e. he aided him. The explanation of the Imam's (AS)
statement is as follows: Then two As' [hamzahs] had combined in one word, due to a
common use of the word, and its heavy pronunciation, the original A' [Hamzah] was omitted,
because they found in the shortened word sounded similar to its full form. Then the two Ls'
[lam] were combined, the first of the two did not contain a vowel, so they assimilated it into the
second. Thus, it became a doubled letter in your word: Allah [Allah].
The One, the Alone [al-Wahid, al-Ahad], the meaning of al-Ahad is that He is One in His
Essence, not possessing parts, components, and limbs. Nor is it permissible to number Him
and ascribe change to Him, because change in things is evidence of His Oneness, which
applies only to Him. It is said: Allah has always been One. The second meaning is that He is
One, there is no equal to Him. Therefore, no one shares with Him the meaning of Oneness,
because all those that have equals and likes are not one in reality. It is also said: he is one of
a kind, i.e. there is no equal to him in what he is attributed with. Allah is One, but not
numerically, because He, the Mighty and High, is not counted among the genus, but He is
One, there is no equal to Him.
210

Some of the philosophers have said about the One and the Alone: Verily, it has been said: He
is One, because He is Solitary and He is the First, because He has no second. Then He
originate all the creation in need of each other. The numerical "one" has nothing before it. In
fact, it comes before all numbers. However way you perceive it or divide it, nothing increases
or decreases the number one. When you say: one divided by one equals one, nothing
increases it, and the word does not change from one. Therefore, the number one indicates
that nothing came before Him. Thus, if it indicates that nothing came before Him, it indicates
that He is the One that brought things about. If He is the One that brought things about, it
indicates that He is the destroyer of Things. If He is the Destroyer of things, then it indicates
that nothing is after Him. Hence, if there is nothing before Him, and nothing after Him, then He
is the Solitary sempiternally. This is why it is said: the One, the Alone.
There are certain characteristics of the Alone [al-Ahad] that are not present in the One [alWahid]. You may say: There is not any one [Wahid] in the house. It can mean that there is no
animal, no bird, no beast, or no human in the house. Therefore, the number one can refer to
people or other than people. However, when you say there is no one [Ahad] in the house, it is
limited to human beings, and others are excluded.
The Unique cannot be subject to multiplication, number, division, and calculation. It is Alone in
Uniqueness. The number one, however, can be subject to the shortcomings of numbers,
divisions, and calculations. You can say: one, two, three... and these are numbers. They
number one, however, is the cause of numbers, is outside of numbers, and is not a number.
For example, one can say: one multiplied by two or three, or any higher numerals. Thus, this is
multiplication. And you may say: two divided by one... Hence, this is division. However, the
Alone cannot be subjected to arithmetic. Hence, it cannot be said: along [Ahad], two, nor alone
divided by one... It is neither said: alone divided by two...
The Needless [al-Samad], its meaning is the Master. Whoever accepts this meaning then it is
permissible for him to say: He has always been the Needless [Samad]. It is said that nobody
administers the affairs of the nation but the ruling authority who is obeyed [Samad]. AS a poet
has said:
I lifted my sword (to take his life) then said to him
Take it, O Hudhayfa, as you are the master who is obeyed [Samad]
There is another meaning for the Samad and that is the objective in the needs. It is said: I
seek him. However, whoever accepts this meaning, then it is not permissible for him to say:
He has always been the Objectie [samad], because he has attributed Himj, the Mighty and
High, with an attribute from the Attributes of Action. This meaning is also correct. Samad has
neither a body nor an interior. I have explained other meanings of Samad in the Commentary
of Chapter 112 of the Quran in this Book, which I do not wish to repeat in this chapter.
The First, the Last [al-Awwal, al-Akhir], their meanings are that He is the First without a
beginning, and the Last without an end.
The All-Hearing [al-Sami], the meaning of this is that if anything audible is found then He is its
Hearer. The other meaning is that He is the Listener of the prayer i.e. answerer of the prayer.
In order to be Hearing [Sami], sound needs to exist. Hence, it is not permissible to say that
Hearing is an attribute of His Essence, Mighty be His Name.
The All-Seeing [al-Basir], the meaning of this is that if there is anything that can be seeing,
then He perceives it. This is why it is permissible to say: He has always been All-Seeing.
While it is not permissible to say: He has always been made to see [mubsir], because that is
transitive, and requires existence. The word "perception" [basarah] is literally a root-word for
All-Seeing [basir], and [basura]. Allah, the Mighty and High, is All-Seeing in His Essence. We
have not attributed for Him, the Blessed and Exalted, that He is All-Hearing, and All-Seeing, as
an attribute that He is All-Knowing (of the two), but what we have stated intends that He
perceives. This is a characteristic of all living beings, and there is no calamity in it.
The Omnipotent, the Subduer [al-Qadir, al-Qahir], the meaning of these two is that things are
unable to refuse His Will. It is said: Verily, the Omnipotent is one from whom any action is
211

possible, so long as it is not impossible. To subdue [qahr] is to overpower [ghalabah].
Omnipotence [qudrah] is a root-word in the statement: he possessed power i.e. controlled
[malaka]. Therefore, He is the Omnipotent [qadir], the All-Powerful [qadir], and the Potent
[muqtadir]. His Omnipotence extends even to what does not exist and His Potency is present
at His Innovation, namely, His Power and His Sovereignty over it. He, Mighty be His
Remembrance, has said: Master of the Day of Judgment. The Day of Judgment does not yet
exist. It is said: Verily, He, the Mighty and High, has always been the Subduer. The meaning
of this is that things do not have the capability of refusal to Him and to what He intends to
execute in them. He has always been the Potent over them even when they did not exists, like
it is said: Master of the Day of Judgment, while the Day of Judgment does not exist yet.
The Most High, the Most Sublime [al--Ali, al-Ala], the meaning of al-Ali is the Subduer.
Therefore, Allah is the Subduer, Possessor of Highness [dhu al-Ula], Loftiness [al-Ala] and
Elevation [al-Taali] i.e. Omnipotent. It is said: the king is exalted in might. It is also said for
everything that is lofty: it was high, it will be elevated, it is lofty, it will be lofty... The word alMalat is derived from al-Maali and literally means to acquire nobility. The ilw of everything is
its higher part: so and so is a prominent figure in people [ilyat al-nas] and it is a noun. The
meanings of elevating, ascending, and descending, do no apply to Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted. The other meaning is that He, Exalted is He, is above resemblances, equals,
whatever goes into a subject, whatever the ignorant image, and what spontaneous thought.
Therefore, He, the elevated and Great, is More Lofty [Mutaalin] than what the oppressors
say. As for the Most Sublime [al-Ala], its meaning is the Most High, and the Subduer. The
Word of the Mighty and High to Musa endorses this: Fear not, surely you shall be the
uppermost, i.e. the subduer. Also the Word of the Mighty and High in inciting the Believers to
combat: And be not infirm, and be not grieving, and you shall have the upper hand [al-a'lawn]
if you are Believers. And the Word of the Mighty and High: Surely Fir'awn exalted himself in
the land, i.e. overpowered them and captured them. A poet has said in this meaning:
Thus, when we overpowered and captured them,
We left them on the ground for the vultures and birds of prey.
The second meaning is that He is Lofty i.e. unblemished from resemblances and equals, like
He says: Exalted is He far above what they associate (with Him).
The Ever-Remaining [al-Baqi], its meaning is the Being who has not come about, and who will
never perish. Remaining is contrary to perishing... It is said: nothing remains of them, and
Allah did not preserve anything of them. The Everlasting is one of His Attributes. He is also the
Ever-Remaining, who does not become extinct, nor perish.
The Originator [al-Badi], its meaning is Creator of Original Creations, and Inventor of the
Things without prior example and imitation. Grammatically, it belongs to the nominal type (on
the scale of) fail in the meaning of active participle mufil, like in the word of the Mighty and
High: A painful chastisement [adhabun alim], while the meaning is not receiving pain, but
rather giving pain. The Arabs say: He hit (receiving pain), and he hit (causing pain) A poet
said:
Is he a good reader and listener?
Who wakes me and my friends while we are peacefully sleeping?
Therefore, the meaning of listening would be listener. The origin [bid] of a thing is the first of
it. As we read in the Word of the Mighty and High: Say: I am not the first [bidan] of the
messengers, i.e. not the first. Al-Bidat also applies to first or innovations in matters of religion,
etc. A poet said:
Your palms are not created for generosity.
And their miserliness is not something new.
Hence, one fist is clenched from good
Like it has decreased from a hundred to seven.
Whereas the other one has three thousand
And nine hundred as a habit.
212

It is also said: You have come up with an original matter, i.e. amazing invention.
The Maker [al-Bari'], its meaning is that He is the Maker of Creatures, i.e. the Creator of the
Creations. He made them, i.e. He created the. The creature is creation. Most of the Arabs
avoid the last vowel (the [] sound at its end). It is an active participle with the sense of a
passive participle, and some of them have said: it is taken from "shaping the wood," some
claim that it is form al-Bary, which is dust, i.e. He has created them from dust, and they say:
This why it does not contain the vowel at its end.
The Most Generous [al-Akram], its meaning is al-Karim. Sometimes the elative expresses the
meaning of the nominal type, like the Word of the Mighty and High: And it is easier [ahwan] to
Him, i.e. it is easy [hayyin] to Him. Like the Word of the Mighty and High: None shall enter it
but the most unhappy [al-ashqa], and His Word: And away from it shall be kept the one who
guards most [al-atqa] (against evil), what is meant by the most unhappy, and the one who
guards against what is adverse [al-shaqi], and one who guards [al-taqi]. A poet has said:
Verily, the One who created the heaven as a roof for us
Created a house with taller, more powerful, pillars, for us.
The Manifest [al-Zahir], its meaning is that He is manifest through His Signs, in which He has
concealed witnesses of His Omnipotence, traces of His Wisdom, and evidence of His Clear
Proof. The created are unable to create the most insignificant of it. Like Allah, the Mighty and
High, says: Surely those whom you call upon besides Allah cannot create a fly, though they
should al gather for it. Therefore, there is nothing in His Creation that does not profess His
Unity. The Blessed and Exalted avoided describing His Essence. Hence, He is manifested
through His signs and Witnesses of His Omnipotence. He is Predominant, and All-Powerful
over whatever He wills. This is found in the Word of the Mighty and High: And they became
uppermost, i.e. predominant over them.
The Hidden [al-Batin], its meaning is that He is Hidden from Imagination. Therefore, He is
Hidden without Encompassment. Nothing encompasses Him, because He has been there
prior to the thoughts. Hence, thoughts are subject to Him. The Known has preceded
everything and cannot be encompassed. Imaginations pas away; hence, they cannot explore
Him. Therefore, He is the Hidden of all Hidden and the Covered of all Covered. He is Hidden
in His Essence, and manifest and Lofty in His signs. Consequently, He is the Hidden without
any cover and Manifest without any approximation. The other meaning of this is that He is the
Interior [batin] of everything i.e. All-Aware and All-Seeing of what they keep secret and what
they disclose, and of whatever is sowed and created. The entourage [batanat] of a man is
composed of people he trusts with his personal affairs. The meaning is that He is All-Knowing
of their secrets, not that He, the Mighty and High, hides in a thing disguising in it.
The Ever-Living [al-Hai], its meaning is that He is the Mighty Doer [al-Faal] and the Director
[al-Mudabbir]. He is Ever-Living by His Own Accord. Death and annihilation are impossible for
Him. He does not need life in order to live.
The All-Wise [al-Hakim], its meaning is that He is all-Knowing. The wisdom is literally the
knowledge. As we read in the Word of the Mighty and High: He grants wisdom to whom He
pleases, (i.e. He grants knowledge). The second meaning is that He is Precise [Muhkam], and
His actions are firm and free from corruption. Hakamtuhu (I commanded him) and ahkamtuhu
(I planned the action precisely) are two literal words. A part of horse's bridle [Hakamah] is
named by such, because it stops a sever blow, and it is what encompasses its mouth.
The Omniscient [al-Alim], its meaning is that He is All-Knowing by Himself. He is All-Knowing
of secrets and All-Informed of minds. The littlest of the things is not hidden from Him, nor can
the weight of an atom escape from Him. He knows things before they take pale and after He
brings them about. He knows what they do in secret, and what they do in public. He knows
what is apparent, and what is hidden. The Mighty and High's knowledge of things is unlike the
creatures' knowledge. Thus, it stands to reason that He, the Blessed and Exalted, is dissimilar
from them in every sense. Allah is omniscient in His Essence. The Omniscient is the Cause of
Firm and Accurate Action. Therefore, it is not said: Verily, He knows things through
213

knowledge; just as nothing eternal exist alongside Him. In fact, it is said: Verily, He is
Omniscient by Essence. Thus, such is said in all of His Attributes of Essence.
The Forbearing [al-Halim], the meaning of this is that He is Forbearing of whoever disobeys
Him. He does not hasten in His Punishment.
The Protector [al-Hafiz], al-hafiz is al-hafiz, that is nominal type of the active participle. Its
meaning is that He protects things and averts from them tribulation. He cannot be attributed
with protecting in the sense of learning, because we use protecting' (in the sense of learning)
when we speak metaphorically of the Quran and other arts. The reason we do so is that when
we learn something and memorize something, it does not leave us. Hence, we protect it.
The Truth [al-Haqq], is an active participle, al-Muhiqq (in the right). He is attributed with it
metaphorically because it is the infinitive. It is like their statement "aid of those who call for
help" [ghiyath al-mustaghuthin]. The other meaning that is intended by it is that service of Allah
is the truth, and service to other than Him is falsehood. The Word of the Mighty and High
endorse this: That is because Allah is the Truth, and that what they call upon besides Him that
is the falsehood, i.e. it becomes falsehood, leaves, and does not promise anyone reward or
punishment.
The Reckoner [al-Hasib], its meaning is that He accounts [al-Muhsi] for everything. He has
knowledge of them and nothing is hidden from Him. The second meaning is that He is the One
who Holds Account [al-Muhasib] for His Servants. He holds them accountable for their actions
and rewards them for those actions. It is a nominal type of the active participle similar to jails
and mujalis (sitting in someone's company). The third meaning is that: He is Sufficient for us.
This thing is enough for me, i.e. sufficient for me. I reckoned him i.e. I bestowed upon him until
he said: "enough for me." This is seen in the Word of the Mighty and High: A reward for your
Lord, a gift according to a reckoning, i.e. a sufficiency.
The Praiseworthy [al-Hamid], the meaning of this is the Praised one [al-Mahmud]; it is the
nominal type of passive participle. Praise is opposite of censure. It is said: I praised so and so
when I was pleased with his action, and spread it among the people.
The Most Gracious [al-Hafi], its meaning is the All-Knowing. As we see in the Word of the
Mighty and High: They ask you as if you were solicitous about it, i.e. they ask you about the
hour (Day of Judgment) as if you know the time of its coming. The other meaning is that He is
the Subtle. Al-higayah is the infinitive; al-Hafi is the Subtle, the One that honors you for your
goodness and kindness.
The Lord [al-Rabb], its meaning is the Master. Whoever possesses a thing is its lord. As we
see in the Word of the Mighty and High: Go back to your lord, i.e. to your Master and
Sovereign. Someone in the Battle of Hunayn saif a man from the Quraysh takes me in his
lordship it is more beloved to me than if someone from the Hawazin taking me to his lordship."
He intends by it that "he owns me and becomes my lord and master." It is not said for the
creation: the Lord with "al" [al-Rabb], because "al" indicates universality. Verily, it is said
regarding creation: lord of so and so (without the "al" or the "the"). Hence, it is recognized in
subjection, because they do not possess other than what is in subjection to them. Therefore,
they are referred by what they possess. The one pertaining to Lord [rabbaniyyun] are referred
to becoming godly and serving the Lord in the meaning of divinity [al-rububiyyah] for Him. The
worshippers of the Lord [al-ribbiyyun] are those who bear patience with the Prophets (AS).
The Most Compassionate [al-Rahman], its meaning is the One who extends Mercy over His
Servants, which is universal for them in sustenance and favor. It is said: it is one of the names
of Allah, the Blessed and High, in the books, which no one else shares with Him. It is said for a
person: merciful [Rahim] of heart, but it is not said: the Most Compassionate, because the
Most Compassionate has the power to remove the calamities, while the most merciful from the
creatures does not have the power. Some people have permitted for a person the use of
"beneficent," and have intended by it the utmost degree of mercy. This is a mistake. The Most
Compassionate applies to the whole world, while the Most Merciful applies to the Believers
specifically.
214

The Most Merciful [al-Rahim], its meaning is that He is Merciful to the Believers. He will select
them for His Mercy on the Day of Judgment. As Allah, the Mighty and High, has said: And He
is Merciful to the Believers. The Most Compassionate [Rahman] and the Most Merciful [Rahim]
are two nouns derived from mercy [rahmah] on the scale of nadman and nadim. The meaning
of mercy is favor. The mercy giver is the favor giver. As Allah, the Mighty and High, says to His
Messenger (SA): And We have not sent you but as a mercy to the worlds, i.e. as a favor upon
them. It is said for the Quran: "guidance and mercy" and for rain that it is a "mercy" or favor.
The meaning of mercy is not softness, because softness from Allah, the Mighty and High, is
negative. Verily, the soft-hearted of the people is named merciful for the increased mercy that
is found in him. It is said: "how close is so and so's mercy." It is saihad mercy on him."
The One that sows [al-Dhari'], its meaning is the Creator. It is said: Allah sowed the creation
and made them i.e. created them. It has been said: that the noun of the descendants [aldhurriyah] has been derived from this, implying that Allah, the Mighty and High, has created
the creatures from a man. Most of the Arabs leave out its vowel []. They certainly leave it out
in this opinion due to its increased frequency in their language, like the omission of the vowel
in the Maker [al-Bari'] and its like. There are others who claim that it is from dharwa or dharya
(to scatter) together, intending that He increased and spread them in the Earth. Like Allah, the
Exalted, says: And spread from these two, many men and women.
The Sustainer [al-Razzaq], its meaning is that He, the Mighty and High, sustains His Servants,
the good and the evil ones of them. Razq (with an a' sound after the t') is a narrative of the
Arabs. If they intend the infinitive then they say: Rizq, with an i'. It is said: the army took their
sustenance one sustenance,' i.e. they took it once.
The Watcher [al-Raqib], the meaning of this is protector. It is the Most Merciful [al-Rahim]. The
affection [al-ra'fah] is mercy.
The Observer [al-Ra'i], the meaning of this is the All-Knowing. The observation is knowledge.
Another meaning is that He is the seeing. It is permissible in the meaning of knowledge to say
that He has always been the Observer. However, this is not permissible in the meaning of
seeing.
The Giver of Peace [al-Salam], its meaning is an active participle, while it is a metaphor,
because al-Salam is an infinitive. What is intended by it is that peace is obtained from Him.
Salam and Salamah (intactness) are like Rida and Ridah (sucking) and like Ladhadh and
Ladhadhah (pleasure). The other meaning is that He is attributed with this attributes for His
intactness from what overtakes the creatures from fault, defect, declination, transformation,
mortality, and death. As we see in the Word of the Mighty and High: They shall have the
abode of peace with their Lord. Thus, the peace is Allah, the Mighty and High, and the abode
is Paradise. It is possible that He may have named Paradise "peace," because the one that
reaches it is intact from the sickness of the world, hardship, death, aging and so forth.
Therefore it is the abode of peace from calamities and disease. As we see in the Word of the
Mighty and High: Then peace to you from those on the fight hand. He is saying that: then
peace to you from them i.e. you will be informed from them of peace. Al-Salamah literally
means proper and appropriate as well. From this is His. Word, the Mighty and High: And when
the ignorant address them, they say: Peace, i.e. appropriate and proper. It is "proper" is
named from the statement peace, because it is secure from fault and sin.
The Granter of Security [al-Mu'min], its meaning is the Believer. If you look up "faith" or "belief"
in a dictionary, they will lead you to this definition. As we see in the Word of the Mighty and
High with regards to the brothers of Yusuf (AS): And you will not believe us though we are
truthful. Thus, a servant is a believer and confirmer in the Unity of Allah and His signs. And
Allah is the One who Believes, and the One who Confirms, what He has promised, and He is
the One who implements it.
The second meaning is that He is the Implementer. In other words, He is the One who
established His Unity by means of His Signs towards His Creation. As a result, the created
can perceive His Signs, His Proofs, His Management, and the brilliance of His Decree.
215

The third meaning is that He has secured them against oppression and tyranny. Al-Sadiq (AS)
said: "The Maker, the Mighty and High, is named Mu'min, because He secures from His
Punishment whoever obeys Him. The servant, moreover is named mu'min, because he
believes in Allah, the Mighty and High. Hence, Allah rewards him His Security." He (AS) also
said: "The believer is he whose neighbor is safe from any harm." He (AS) has also said: "The
believer is he whom the Muslims trust with their lives and property."
The Guardian over all [al-Muhaymin], its meaning is the Witness. It is like His Word of the
Mighty and High, And a guardian over it, i.e. witness over it. The other meaning is that it is an
indeclinable noun grammatically from the word al-Amin. Al-Amin is one of the names of Allah,
the Mighty and High. Then it was constructed like the construction of al-Mubaytir from alBaytar and al-Bayar (epicure). As if the original in it is Mu'ymin, the [] was changed into h.'
Just as it was changed in Araqat and Ayhat, hence, it is said: Harqat and Hayhat. Amin is one
o the names of Allah, the Mighty and High. Whoever prolongs the a' intends ya amin.'
Therefore, it is brought out in the phonetic of their statement: Aa Zayad' in the meaning of Ya
Zayd.' It is said: al-Muhaymin is one the names of Allah, the Mighty and High in previous
(divine) Books.
The Honorable [al-Azizi], its meaning is that He is not incapable of anything and nothing
prevents Him from anything He intends. Thus, He is the Subduer over all things, and the
Undefeated Victor. It is said in a proverb: "whoever has honor excels" i.e. whoever is victorious
denies (others). The Word of the Mighty and High relating two enemies: And he has prevailed
against me in discourse, i.e. he has overpowered me in answering the discourse. The other
meaning is that He is the Sovereign and it is said for the Sovereign: Aziz, like the brothers of
Yusuf (AS) said to him: O Aziz, and the intention by it is "O sovereign."
The Supreme [al-Jabbar], its meaning is the subduer who cannot be overcome. He
demonstrates Power and Might, i.e. Pride and Majesty. It is said to the date tree which cannot
be reached: jabbarah. Al-Jabr is to compel a human forcefully over what he dislikes. You may
say: I compelled him to so and so. Al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Neither compulsion nor complete freewill, but rather something between the two." He (AS) meant by it: Verily, Allah, the Blessed
and Exalted, has neither compelled His Servants to disobey, nor has He delegated authority to
them in the matters of religion so that they may express their own personal views and
suppositions. For, verily, the Mighty and High has set bounds, assigned duties, prescribed
laws determined obligations and recommendations, and has completed for them their religion.
Therefore, there is no free-will within the set limits, assigned duties, prescribed laws,
obligations, recommendations and the completion of religion.
The Possessor of All-Greatness [al-Mutakabbir], is derived from al-kibriya' (the pride), and that
is the noun for pride [al-takabbur] and reverence [taazzum].
The Master [al-Sayyid], its meaning is the sovereign. It is said for the sovereign and the great
of a nation: "their master." He became their master, and will become their master. Qays ibn
Asim was askeow did you become the master your people?" He replied: "Through
generosity, preventing suffering, and seeking help from the Lord." The Prophet (SA) said: "Ali
is the Master of the Arabs." Hence, A'ishah asked, "O Messenger of Allah, are you not the
Master of the Arabs?" He (SA) answered, "I am the Master of all the children of Adam (AS)
and Ali is the Master of all the Arabs." She then asked, "O Messenger of Allah! What is the
meaning of Master?" He (SA) responded, "The one to whom obedience is mandatory, like my
obedience is mandatory."
I have mentioned this tradition with chain of transmission in the book Maani al-Akhbar. Based
on this tradition, the meaning of "the Master" is the sovereign whose obedience is mandatory.
The Most Praised [al-Subbuh], it is grammatically an indeclinable noun from the nominal type
scale faul. There is no other word on this scale in the Arabic language except Subbuh and
Quddus and their meaning is one. Subhan Allah (Glory be Allah) is used to
deanthropomorphise Allah from everything that cannot be attributed to Him. Grammatically it is
in the accusative case [mansub], because it is used in place of a verb in order to glorify Allah
216

with the sense, that I glorified Allah with glory. It is possible that it may be accusative being an
adverb, and its meaning is we glorify Allah or we do glorify Allah.
The Witness[al-Shahid], the meaning of this is that He is the Witness over every space as
Creator and Planner, and that the space is part of His Creation and Plan. That is not to say
that space is a place for Him, because He, the Mighty and High, existed when there was no
space.
The Most Truthful [al-Sadiq], the meaning of this is that He is Truthful in His Promise. He does
not diminish the reward of whoever keeps with His Promise.
The Manufacturer [al-Sani], its meaning is that He is the Manufacturer of everything which
has ever been manufactured i.e. Creator of every created thing and the Inventor of all the
invented. All of this is an indication that nothing from His Creation resembles Him. This is
because no action resembles its agent and because bodies and their actions are non-entities.
Allah is far above resembling His Actions. His Actions create flesh, bone, hair, blood, nerves,
veins, organs, limbs, components, light, darkness, Earth, heaven, stone, trees, and other
things from the categories of the creatures. All of these are the actions and creations of the
Mighty and High. They are all proofs of His Unity, and witness that He is Solitary, is Different
from His Creation, and that He has no partner.
Some of the philosophers have expressed this meaning when describing the narcissus:
The eyes with the eyelids and they come into view with contrast,
The Sovereign has manufactured them with excellence.
Eyes were aspiring with dalliance,
As if the pupils of the eyes had gone cast
On the branches of emerald, informing
That Allah has no associate.
The Pure [al-Tahir], its meaning is that He is deanthropomorphised from the resemblances,
equals, opponents, likeness, bounds, declination, transformation, the implications of creatures
like length, width, diameter, weightiness and lightness, softness and thickness, entering and
exiting, adhering and parting, smell and taste, color and shape, roughness and smoothness,
heat and cold, motion and stillness, joining and paring, and changing places, because all of
these are accidental, created, incapable and weak fro all dimensions. Thus, it is proof over the
One who brought them about and manufactured them. He is proof over the One who brought
them about and manufactured them. He is Omnipotent, Powerful and Pure in their meanings
that nothing resembles Him. Hence, they point to the Manufacturer that manufactured them
and the One who brought them about. It has been made compulsory for them to point to their
Manufacture. Exalted is Allah, the Elevated, the Great.
The Just [al-Adl], its meaning is to judge with justice and righteousness. He is named by it
metaphorically, because it is the infinitive. The intention is "the Just." The just person is the ne
whose words, actions, and judgments are satisfactory.
The Pardoning [alAfuww], it is a derived noun from al-afw on the scale of faul. Al-afw is to
wipe out. It is said: something is pardoned when it is wiped out, left, or erased. I pardoned him
when I left him. According to the Word of the Mighty and High: Allah pardon you! Why did you
give them leave, i.e. Allah passed over you for your giving them leave.
The Forgiving [al-Ghafur], it is a derived noun from al-maghfirah. He is al-Ghfir (the Forgiving)
and al-Ghaffar (Much-Forgiving). Literally its origin is to cover and to shield. You may say: I
forge a thing when I covered it. It is also said: "this is more forgiving than this" i.e. more
covering. Ghafr of wool and silk fabric is what accumulates on top of cloth like lint. It is named
ghafr, because it covers the cloth. It is also said for the head shield: mighfar, because it covers
the head. Al-Ghafur is He who covers His Servant with His Mercy.
The Self-Sufficient [al-Ghani], its meaning is that He is the Self-Sufficient. He is not in need of
others. He does not rely on instruments or devices, etc. All things, except Allah, the Mighty
and High, are similar in limitation and need. None of them rise without the help of each other,
and none of them are self-sufficient of each other.
217

The Aid [al-Ghiyath], the meaning of this is Deliverer from Distress [al-Maghith]. However, He
is named this fro showing entirety, as this word is grammatically an infinitive.
The Cleaver [al-Fatir], the meaning of this is the Creator. He cleaved the creation i.e. He
created and originated the creation of things, and did it first. Therefore, He is its Cleaver i.e. its
Creator and its Originator.
The Peerless [al-Fard], the meaning of this is that He is the Possessor of Lordship and
Command, Alone without need for His Creation. The second meaning is: He is the Sole
Existent, and nothing coexists with Him.
The Opener [al-Fattah], its meaning is that He is the Judge. According to the Word of the
Mighty and High: And Thou art the Best of Deciders. And the word of the Mighty and High:
And He is the greatest Judge, the All-knowing.
The Splitter [al-Faliq], it is derived noun from al-falq, and literally means "to split." It is sai
heard this from the split of his mouth," and "I split the pistachio and it opened." Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, created everything. In other words, He split open everything that He
created. He split the wombs; hence, animals were split from them, He split seeds and fruits
kernels so that plants split from them. He split the Earth; everything that comes out of it split
out. It is like the Word of the Mighty and High: And the Earth splitting, i.e. He split it so it split
open. He split the darkness, and the morning split out. He "split" the clouds; hence, the rain
split out. He split the ocean for Musa (AS), thus it split open and every part of it was like a
huge mountain.
The Eternal [al-Qadim], its meaning is that He was prior to all things. Everything that comes
before another thing is called eternal when one exaggerates. However He, the Glorified, is
Eternal in Himself without any beginning or an end. All other things have a beginning and an
end, and they are not eternal in origin. Therefore, they are eternal in one dimension. And
accidental in another dimension. It is said: Verily, the meaning of the Eternal is that He has
always been existent, and when it is applied to other than the Mighty and high, the word
"eternal" is used in a metaphorical sense, because everything other than Him is accidental,
and not eternal.
The Sovereign [al-Malik], He is the Master of the Kingdom. He possesses everything. Almalakut (the Realm) is the Kingdom of Allah, the Mighty and High. The "t" is added to it like in
rahabut (fear) and rahamut (mercy). The Arabs say: "Fear is better than mercy" i.e. to frighten
others is better than to receive mercy.
The Most Holy [al-Quddus], its meaning is the Pure. Al-taqdis is purification and
deanthropomorphism. As we see in the Word of the Mighty in High relating to the Angels: And
we celebrate Thy Praise and extol Thy Holiness, i.e. we relate to you the purification. To
praise and extol have the same meaning. Paradise [hazirat al-quds] is the place of purification
from impurities, hardships, pains and their likes, which are in this world. It is said: Verily, alQuddus from the names of Allah, the Mighty and High, is found in the (divine) Books.
The Powerful [al-Qawi], its meaning is know, and it refers to the One who is Powerful
Independently, and who does not require nay help or assistance.
The Near [al-Qarib], its meaning is the Answerer of Prayers. The Word of the Mighty and High
endorse this interpretation: Then surely I am very near; I answer the prayer of the supplicant
when he calls upon Me.
The second meaning is that He is All-Knowing when it comes to the whispers of the heart.
There is no veil or space between Him and them. This interpretation is endorsed by the Word
of the Mighty and High: And certainly We created man, and We know what his mind suggests
to him, and We are nearer to him than his life-vein. Therefore, He is near without contract, and
evident from His Creation without trace and space. In fact, He is separate from them not by
mingling among them, and He is different from them in appearance. Likewise, to be near to
Him does not mean to be near to Him in terms of place and space. Rather, it refers to
obedience and excellence in service. Thus, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is Near and Close
in Proximity without lowering Himself, because He does not lower Himself through space just
218

like He does not rise in the air. How could He, when he existed before there was anything low
or anything high, and before He could be attributed with highness or lowness.
The Self-Subsistent [al-Qayyum], al-Qayyum and al-Qayyam are on the scale of Fayul and
Fayal. They are form "I stood up for a thing" [qumtu] when one turns towards a thing by
himself, and takes charge of protecting it, restoring it and assessing it. Its illustration is their
statement: "There is no rotator in this, nor monk."
The Seizer (of Souls) [Qabid], it is a derived noun from al-qabd. There are a few meanings for
qabd. Some of which are: "the kingdom," it is said: "so and so is in my seizure" and "this
domain is in my seizure." As we see in the Word of the Mighty and High: And the whole Earth
shall be in His Grip [qabdah] on the Day of Resurrection. This is like the Word of Allah, the
Mighty and High: And His is the Kingdom on the Day when the trumpet shall be blown. The
Word of the Mighty and High: And the Command on that day shall be entirely Allah's. And the
Word of the Mighty and High Master of the Day of Judgment.
To seize also refers to death, as in the expression: "Allah seized him to Himself." As we see in
the Word of the Mighty and High: Then We have made the sun an indication of it. Then We
take it [qabadna] to Ourselves, taking little by little. The sun is not seized by the fist. Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, is its Seizer and Releaser. As we see in the Word of the Mighty and
High: And Allah straitens and amplifies, and you shall be returned to Him. Therefore, He is the
Amplifier Excess over His Servants, and the Seizer of Whatever He wills from His bounties
and Support.
Seizure is also the grip of the first. However, it is not applicable to Allah, the Exalted. If the
Seizure and release that Allah, the mighty and High, has mentioned applied to the fist, then it
is not possible that they could be at one time seized and released. Allah, Exalted be His
Remembrance, seizes the souls in every moment, releases their sustenance, and does what
He wills.
The Extender [Basit], Its meaning is the Benefactor [al-Munim], and the Granter [al-Mufdil].
He has released over His servants His Excess and Beneficence, and showered His Bounties
upon them.
The Provider of Needs [Qadi al-Hajat], is a derived noun from al-qada'. When applied to Allah,
the meaning of al-qada' has three meanings.
The first meaning is command and compulsion." It is said: "the Provider provided so and so
with such and such." i.e. he commanded him, and compelled him to it. As we see in the Word
of the Mighty and High: And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve (any) but Him.
The second meaning is "to make known," and from this are the Word of the Mighty and High:
And We had made known to the children of Israel in the Book, i.e. We made it know to them
through the tongue of the Prophet (SA).
The third meaning is "to conclude," and from it are the Word of the Mighty and High: So He
concluded them seven heavens in two days. From it is the statement of the people: "so and so
provided me with a need," intending that he concluded my requirement with what I had asked
him for.
The All-Glorious [al-Majid], its meaning is the Generous, the Honorable. From this is the Word
of the Mighty and High: Nay! It is a glorious Qur'an i.e. generous and honorable. Al-Majid
literally is to obtain nobility. Majjad and Amjad are two different words (both may mean to
honor). Amjada is to honor someone's actions. The other meaning of Majid is "the Glorified"
[Mumajjad], His Creation glorified Him, i.e. revered Him.
The Guardian [al-Mawla], its meaning is the Helper. He helps the Believers and protects them
from their enemies. He is responsible for rewarding them and honoring them. The guardian of
a child is the one responsible for protecting his affairs. Allah is the Guardian of the Believers
and their Helper. Another meaning of Al-Mawla is "more entitled." From this is the tradition of
the Prophet (SA): "To whoever I am the Guardian, Ali is also his Guardian." This came after a
statement that he (SA) had made: "Am I not more entitled over you than yourselves?" They
replied: "Of course, O Messenger of Allah!" He (SA) said: "To whomever I am the Guardian,"
219

i.e. to whomever I am more entitled, "then Ali (AS) is his Guardian,' i.e. Ali (AS) is more
entitled over them than they themselves.
The Granter [al-Mannan], its meaning is the Bestower, and the Benefactor. From it is the Word
of the Mighty and High: Therefore, give freely or withhold, without reckoning. And the Word of
the Mighty and High: And bestow not favor that you may receive again with increase.
The One who Encompasses Everything [al-Muhit], its meaning is that He encompasses
everything, and is All-Knowing of all of them. Whoever grasps something in its entirety the
reaches the highest point of knowledge, and Allah encompasses that. This is metaphorical,
because to encompass refers in reality to a large entity acquiring a small one in every
dimension. For example, a house encompasses its contents, and the walls of a city
encompass everything which is in the city. It is for this reason the wall are names ha'it in
Arabic (as they encompass the house). The other possibility is that it is an adverb in the
accusative. In that case, the meaning would be "overpowered" like the Word of the Mighty and
High: And they become certain that they are encompassed about. This is the verb "to
encompass" because when people encompass their enemies, their enemies cannot escape
them.
The Clear [Mubin], its meaning is the Manifested, whose Wisdom is evident. He is the One
who demonstrates by means of His Clear Proofs and the Signs of His Omnipotence. It is said:
bana abama and istabana all have the same meaning (to clarify or distinguish).
The Nourisher [al-Maqit], its meaning is the Protector and the Watcher. It is said: rather, it
refers to the Omnipotent.
The Imager [al-Musawwir], it is a derived noun from al-taswir. He forms the images in the
womsb how He wills. Therefore, He is the Imager of all Images and the creator of every image
in the womb, and what is perceived by vision, and depicted in an individual. Allah the Blessed
and Exalted, cannot be described as having an image or having limbs. He cannot be
described with boundaries or part. Imagination cannot locate Him in space. However, He is
recognized through signs, He is identified through symbols and indications. By these He is
ascertained. He is given the attributes of Omnipotence, Reverence, Glory and Pride, because
He does not resemble His Creation nor is He comparable to His Creatures.
The Generous [al-Karim], its meaning is the honorable. It is said: so and so is more generous
to me than so and so, i.e. more honorable than him. As we see in the Word of the Mighty and
High: Most surely it is an honored Qur'an. And likewise the Word of the Mighty and High:
Taste; you forsooth are the mighty, the honorable. The other meaning for this is that He is
Generous, and He is the Granter. It is said: "A man who is a karim man" i.e. generous. People
who are karim i.e generous men. Karim and karam are like admin and adam (skin).
The Great [al-Kabir] is the Master. It is said for the master of a nation: the great one among
them. Al-kibriya' (the pride) is the noun for pride and reverence.
The sufficient [al-Kafi], it is derived noun from al-kifayah (sufficiency), Whoever relies on Him,
that suffices him, and he does not have to rely on others.
The Remover of Harm [Kashif al-Dur], its meaning is the Reliever who Answers the Distressed
One when he calls upon Him, and removes the evil. "Removal" literally means to take away a
thing that it conceals and covers.
The Singular [al-Watr], is the Peerless, and everything that is peerless is called: singular.
The Light [al-Nur], its meaning is the Illuminator [al-Munir], As we see in the Word of the
Mighty and High: Allah is the light of the Heavens and the Earth, i.e. the One who enlightens
them, commands them, and guides them. Therefore, they are guided by Him in their interest,
like they are guided by light and brightness. This is metaphorical as the light is a source of
brightness, and Allah, the Mighty and High, is Exalted form being "Light," because light is
accidental, and the One who brought it into existence is Eternal. Nothing resembles Him.
Similarly, it is said metaphorically that: "Verily, the Quran is light, because the people are
guided by it in their religion, like they are guided b the brightness in their paths." It can said in
the same sense that the Prophet (SA) was the Light of Guidance.
220

The Bestower [al-Wahhab], its meaning is known. It is derived from al-hibah (to grant). He
grants to His Servants what He wills, and obliges them as He wills. As we see in the Word of
the Mighty and High: He grants to who He pleases daughters, and grants to whom He pleases
sons.
The Helper [al-Nasir], al-Nasir and al-Nasir have the same meaning. To help is to proved good
assistance.
The Ample-Giving [al-Was], is the Self-Sufficient, and giving is self-sufficiency. It is said: so
and so bestows with ample-giving, i.e. with sufficiency. Ample-giving is the generosity of a
man, and the power of what is in his control. It is said: "give away based upon the limit of your
giving."
The Loving One [al-Wadud], is a nominal type of the passive participle, like it is said: hayub in
the meaning of mahib (the feared). What is intended by it is that He is "the Loved One, and the
Cherished One." It has been said: it is rather a nominal type of the actie participle, like the
word: ghafur in the meaning of ghafir i.e. He loves His servants and cherishes them. Al-wudd
and al-widad are infinitives of al-mawaddah. So and so has wudd and wadid, i.e. loves you
and is your lover.
The Guide [al-Hadi], its meaning is that He, the Mighty and High, guides them to the truth. The
guidance from Allah, the Mighty and High, has three meanings. The first meaning is "leading."
He leads them to the religion (of Islam). The second meaning is "faith." Faith is guidance from
Allah, the Mighty and High, like it is a bounty from Allah, the Mighty and High. The third
meanng is "salvation." Allah, the Mighty and High, has explained that He will guide the
Believers after their death, and has said: And (as for) those who are slain in the way of Allah,
He will by no means allow their deeds to perish. He will guide them and improve their
condition.
Guidance after being killed and dying cannot refer to anything else but salvation. Likewise, the
Word of the Mighty and High: Surely (as for) those who believe and do good, their Lord will
guide them by their faith. This is contrary to misguidance which is the punishment of an
unbeliever Allah, the Mighty and High says: And Allah causes the unjust to go astray, i.e. He
will destroy them and punish them and it is like the Word of the Mighty and High: He shall
render their works ineffective, i.e. He will obliterate their actions, and confiscate them due to
their disbelief.
The Reliable [al-Wafi], its meaning is that He completes His Promise to them, and fulfils it. It is
said: "A reliable man and one fulfilling his promise." "Completing one's promise" and "fulfilling
it" are two different things.
The Custodian [al-Wakil], its meaning is the Entrusted, i.e. the One who rises Up to Protect
Us. This is the meaning of the Custodian over our Belongings. The second meaning is that He
is the Dependable [al-Mutamad], and the Refuge [al-Malja]. Reliance is to depend upon Him,
and to seek refuge from Him.
The Inheritor [al-Warith], its meaning is that the Kingdom of Allah remains even after He
causes something to die. Therefore, no one possesses it except Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted.
The Righteous [al-Barr], its meaning is the Truthful. It is said: so and so told the truth and did
the right thing. It is also said: so and so's oath was righteous when he told the truth. And it is
also said: Allah justified him, i.e. approved him from the truth.
The Raiser [al-Baith], its meaning is that He will raise the ones in the graves, bring them back
to life, resurrect them to reward them, and grant them everlasting life.
The Oft-Returning (in mercy) [al-Tawwab], its meaning is that He accepts the repentance of
the repentant and forgives his sins. It is said that the servant repented to Allah, the Mighty and
High; therefore, He returned to Him. Also Allah returned to him, i.e. accepted his repentance;
therefore, He is the Oft-Returning to him. Al-Tub is repentance. It is said: "so and so much
repented from such and such," when he is ashamed of it. It is also said: "there is no
repentance from food," i.e. there is no timidity or shame in (consuming) it.
221

The Sublime [al-Jalil], its meaning is the Master; it is said for the master of a nation: "their
sublime and most great." All glory belongs to Allah. He is the Sublime, the Lord of Glory and
Honor. It is also said: "so and so is glorified in my sight," i.e. he is great and "I sublimed him"
i.e. revered him.
The Generous [al-Jawad], its meaning is the Most Compassionate [al-Muhsin], the Benefactor,
the Giver of favors and beneficence. It is said: "the open-handed [sakhi] from the people gives
generously," "a generous man" and "generous people." Ajwad and Jud are the generous. The
word [sakhi] is not used for Allah, the Mighty and High, because it related to "softness." It is
said: "soft Earth," and "soft paper" from the word [sakhawi]. The open-handed is called so due
to his softness or tenderness towards the needy.
The All-Aware [al-Khabir], the meaning of this is All-Knowing [al-Alim]. Al-Khubr and al-Khabir
are literally the same. Al-Khubr is the knowledge of something, it is said: I am aware of
something i.e. I have knowledge of it.
The Creator [al-Khaliq], its meaning is al-Khallaq. He created the creatures, and made a
creation. Al-Khaliqah is creation, and its plural is al-Khalaiq. Al-Khalq is literally one's
estimation of a thing. It is said in a proverb: "Verily, if I estimate something then I cut it, not like
the one who estimates, and does not cut." It has come in the traditions of our Imams (AS):
"Verily, the actions of the servants are created by means of an estimated creation, and not a
constituted creation." Isa (AS) also created from clay the figure of a bird; that was also an
estimated creation. The Constituent of a bird and its Creator is in reality Allah, the Mighty and
High.
The Best of the Helpers [Khayr al-Nasirin], and the Best of the Merciful, refers to the fact that
when good is increased by the One who Grants it, it is called "the Best" in a metaphorical
sense.
The Rewarder [al-Dayyan] is the One who gives religion to the servants, and rewards them for
their actions. Din is literally "reward." It does not have a plural because it is infinitive. It is said:
"he rewarded, will reward a rewarding." It is also said in a proverb: "Like you reward, you will
be rewarded," i.e. what you give, you get. A poet said:
The way a young man rewards, one day he will be rewarded the same way.
He who sows garlic does not harvest sweet basil.
The Thankful [al-Shakkur] and al-Shakir refers to the fact that He thans servants for their good
deeds. The attribute is allegorical since thanking is literally recognition of beneficence. He is
the Most Compassionate to His Servants, and their Benefactor. When the Glorified rewards
those who obey Him, He rewards them by means of thanking them metaphorically, just like the
reward of the benefactor is thanking.
The Most Great [al-Azim], its meaning is the Master, and the master of a nation is their
sublime and the most great. The second meaning is that He is revered because He
overpowers all things, and He is Omnipotent over them. This is why He is revered. The third
meaning is that He is the Most Great, because all others are humble and submissive before
Him. Therefore, He is the Greatest Ruler, and is the Highest in Rank. The fourth meaning is
that He is the All-Glorious. It is said: "so and so is grate in the glory, grandeur" [azamah]. Alazamah is infinitive; its meaning is a great matter. Al-azamah is to show power. The meaning
of the Most Great is not dense, tall, wide and heavy, because these meanings apply to
creation, are signs of created beings, and are accidental. These are negated from Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted. It has been narrated in a tradition that He has been named "the Most
Great," because He is the Creator of the Greatest Creatures, and the Lord and Creator of the
Greatest Throne.
The Subtle [al-Latif], its meaning is that He is Kind with His Servants. Therefore, He is Kind
and Benevolent towards them as He is their Benefactor. Kindness is benevolence and honor.
It is said: so and so is king [latif] with the people, benevolent to them, and honors them with
kindness. The second meaning is that He is Subtle in His Planning and action. It is said: so
and so is subtle [latif] in action. It is narrated in a tradition that the meaning of al-Latif is that He
222

is the Creator of Subtle Creations, in the same way that He is named the Most Great [al-Azim]
because He is the Creator of the Greatest Creation.
The Cure [al-Shafi], its meaning is known. It is from cure [al-Shifa'] like Allah, the Mighty and
High, has said reporting Ibrahim (AS): And when I am sick, then He restores me to health.
Thus, the sum of these Most Beautiful Names is Ninety-Nine.
The Blessed [Tabaraka], this is from the blessing [barakah]. He, the Mighty and High, is the
Possessor, Perpetrator, Creator and Granter of Blessings upon His Creation. Blessed and
Exalted is He from having a son, a partner, an associate, or anything else the oppressors may
claim of the Elevated, and Great. As we see in the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High:
Blessed is He who sent down the Furqan upon His Servant (Muhammad) that he may be a
Warner to the nation.
Verily, what is meant is that Allah's existence is everlasting, His bounties are endless, and His
Remembrance is a blessing for His Servants. The continuation of Allah's blessings towards
His Servants is that He sent them the Criterion as a Warner to the nations.
The Furqan is the Quran and it has been certainly named the Furqan (the criterion), because
Allah, the Mighty and High, differentiates by it between truth and falsehood. The servant upon
whom He sent it down to is Muhammad (SA). He named him "servant" to prevent him from
being taken as a Lord or Deity. This is a refutation of the exaggerators.
The Mighty and High has clarified that He has revealed it to him so that he may warn with it
the nations and frighten them by it from the disobedience of Allah and His Painful
Chastisement. Al-alamun (the nations) are the people. He, whose is the kingdom of heaven
and the Earth, and who did not take to Himself a son, as the Christians claim falsely by adding
a son to Him, and deviating fro the belief in Diving Unity. And who has no associate in the
kingdom, and who created everything, then ordained for it a measure, i.e. He created all things
in a measure that He knows. He did not create anything negligently, carelessly, with trouble or
by means of speculation. In fact, He created everything in just measure according to His Plan.
He created everything according to the best interest of His Servants and their religion.
This is a manifestation of His Justice towards His Creation. Had He not created the world in jut
measure, on the basis of what we have described, then incongruity and injustice would have
been found within it. His Creation would not have been made in wisdom and correct planning,
and would have been subject to uselessness, injustice, and corruption.
Allah, glory be Him, has always been All-Knowing of all things. Verily, He meant by His word:
then ordained for it a measure that He carried it out based on a measurement He Knows (as
we have explained) and to ordain His Actions for His Servants to make them recognize its
measurement, its time, and where it will take place. This planning from Allah, the Mighty and
High, is written and reported. Allah has notified His Angels and informed of it so that they may
know it.
Therefore, when His Words are found in measurement He introduces them so that they may
not go out of the limits of truth to falseness, from the limits of correctness to incorrectness, and
from the limits of clarity to deception This is an indication that Allah ordained it, made it firm,
and brought it about. Thus, it is perfect. There is no flow, incongruity or corruption in it.
10. More than one have said: Muhammad ibn Hammam said, on the authority of Ali ibn alHusayn that Jafar ibn Yahya al-KhuzaI related to me, on the authority of his father that

223

H o
Ge % L G $ G G G H L
m G%G G G G 2 G L
G G $ H G G G G $ H G " G G 2 G%G G
2 3 GG

. !

I entered in the presence of Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) and his followers when they
were visiting a patient. Thus, I saw the man repeating "Oh" so I said to him: "O brother!
Remember your Lord and call Him for help." Then Abu Abd Allah (AS) spoke, "Verily,
Oh' is a name from the names of Allah, the Mighty and High. Therefore, whoever utters:
Oh' has already called Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, for help"
11. Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Abd Allah ibn Ahmad al-Isbahani al-Aswari said: Makki ibn Ahmad
ibn Sadawayh al-BurdhaI said: Abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Qarashi reported to
us in Damascus and I was listening that Abu Amir Musa ibn Amir al-Mirri said: al-Walid ibn
Muslim said: Zuhayr ibn Muhammad said, on the authority of Musa ibn Uqbah, on the
authority of al-Araj, on the authority of Abu Hurayrah that

3 qC G 3 % H G" Z G H G " Z OG Z G G Z G ! 2 3 H G " : G H
. H
The Messenger of Allah (SAS) said: Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has NinetyNine names: one hundred minus one. He is Single and loves odd numbers. Whoever
counts them will enter Paradise.
Thus, it has reached us that more than one scholar has said that the first one of them starts
with: There is no god but Allah, He Alone, He has no associates. To Him belongs all
Sovereignty, and to Him is the Praise. In His hand is all goodness, and He has power over all
things. There is no god but Allah, His are the Best Names: Allah, the One, the Needless, the
First, the Last, the Manifested, the Hidden, the Creator, the Maker, the Imager, the Sovereign,
the Most Holy, the Giver of Peace, the Granter of Security, the Guarding Over All, the
Honorable, the Supreme, the Possessor of all Greatness, the Beneficent, the Most Merciful,
the Subtle, the All-Aware, the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing, the Most High, the Most Great, the
Maker, the High, the Sublime the Beautiful [al-Jamil], the Ever-Living, the Self-Subsistent, the
All-Powerful, the Subduer, the All-Wise, the Near, the Granter [al-Majib], the Self-Sufficient,
the Bestower, the Loving one, the Thankful, the Glorified [al-Majid], the Unique, the Guardian
[al-Wali], the Rightly Directing [al-Rashid], the Forgiving, the Generous, the Forbearing, the
Oft-Returning (in mercy), the Lord, the All-Glorious, the Praiseworthy, the Reliable, the
Witness, the Clear, the Evidence [al-Burhan], the Affectionate, the First to do [al-Mubdi'] the
Resorter [al-Muid], the Raiser, the Inheritor, the Powerful, the Severe in punishment [alShadid], the Punisher [al-Dar], the Beneficial [al-Naf], the Sufficient [al-Wafi], the Protector [alHafiz], the Exalter [al-Rafi], the Seizer (of souls), the Extender, the Honor-Bestower [alMuizz], the One who abases [al-Mudhill], the Sustainer, the Lord of unbreakable strength
[Dhul-Quwat al-Matin], the Riser, the Custodian, the Just, the Assembler [al-Jami], the Giver
[al-Muti], the Selecter [al-Mujtabi], the Reviver [al-Muhyi], the One who makes to dies [alMumit], the Sufficient, the Guide, the Everlasting [al-Abad], the Most Truthful, the Light, the
Eternal, the Truth, the Peerless, the Singly, the All-Embracing [al-Was], the Counter [al224

Muhsi], the Powerful, the One who precedes all [al-Muqaddam], the One who comes last [alMuakhkhar], the Avenger [al-Muntaqim], the Originator.
12. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of al-Hasan
ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Ali ibn Ri'ab, on the authority of more than one person that

2 }
2 : G G2 G
G 2 m G 2 }

3G G G% G G mG(R)G 2 (c)

G d G%G G G GG O

.b

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: Whoever serves Allah with his imagination,
disbelieves (in Allah). Whoever serves His name without (understanding) the meaning,
disbelieves in Allah. Whoever serves both His name and its meaning, has given a
partner to Allah. Whoever serves Allah by means of the meanings of the Names of Allah
has attributed Himself with, has faith in Allah, which his tongue utters in private and in
public. Such are the followers of the Commander of the Faithful.
In another version, the last sentence of the tradition is: "These are the true Believes."
13. Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Isam al-Kulayni and Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Imran al=Daqqaq ( may Allah have mercy on them both) both said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub
al-Kulayni said, on the authority of Ali ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of al-Nadr ibn Suwayd, on the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that

Z d G m % G " E% G " G I G G H H G G G G 2 d % H

G 2 Z 2 m }

H H G~ G L G L G I G H G G
2 G G 2

HG Z IG" I G E C

G G G d G 2 G I C G G G I G G%

G 3 G%G 3 I G L G I G {
E G G GG H G7 G~ I G G G H G%G Y Y L H
. GO L H

225

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the names of Allah, the Mighty and High,
and their derivations. Hence, he replied, Allah is derived from Ilah (God). The word Ilah
requires a server [Ma'luh], The name is other than the named. Therefore, whoever
serves the name without the meaning then he disbelieves, and has not served anything.
Whoever serves the name, and the meaning, he has associated, and has served both of
them. Whoever serves the meaning without he name has embraced Divine Unity. Have
you understood, O Hisham? He says, I sailaborate for me." He (AS) responded, For
Allah, the Mighty and High, are Ninety Nine Names. If the name was the named then
every name would have been a god. However Allah, the Mighty and High, has a
meaning for all of these names which apply to Him, and all of them are other than Him.
O Hisham! "Bread" is a name of a food; "water" is a name of a drink; "cloth is a name
of a material, and "fire" is a name of ignition. Do you understand, O Hisham? Do you
understand in such a way that you can defend us, and defeat our enemies, the
apostates of Allah, and the one who associate other with Allah, the Mighty and High?
I replied, "Yes." He (AS) then said: "May Allah benefit you by it and secure you, O
Hisham!" Hisham says, "I swear by Allah, no one could defeat me in debate on the
subject of Divine Unity after I stood up from that place."
14. Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Abd Allah ibn Ahmad al-Aswari said: Makki ibn Ahmad ibn
Sadawayh al-BurdhaI that Ismail ibn Muhammad ibn al-Fadl ibn Muhammad ibn alMusayyib al-Bayaqi reported to us that My grandfather related to me that Ibn Abu Uways said:
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Dawud ibn Qays al-Sanani related to me that Aflah ibn Kathir
related to me, on the authority of Ibn Jurayj, on the authority of Amr ibn Shuayb, on the
authority of his father that

H Z G 2 Z G G% G

C I G G% G O H _ G H G

HG I G 3 E HG I G G"

G O

G O H I G o
G O

_ GG I G G G G G

G G _ _ qG G H G G

G >
G H o
G _ d G _ H I G G 2 G _ G Z OG

I >
I >

E G 2 G O
Z E G G G G G G!" G G m G G 2 >

C G G G I 2 G (R) Z G

%2G _ GG I G G G G G " G #

226

G 2 G
G H H % 3 G H G " {

3/4
I G H G Z G2 % H H G }

_ qG G " G G HG G G G "
C G k

E U

G G " G G G G!"E G _ E G G _

% o
G H o
I G G 2 G _ G Z OG G " GG O H G % H G G G _

I ! 2 3 _ H G " Y n

H >
H % G GG G % % > }

G G 2

H G 2

G GG H O G 2 G G G G

% G G G G " G G G % 2 G " _ G n

2 GH G G _ d G " GG O G2 G
% G % G%G3 % 3 G " G% L GH G % ~ G G O I GH G
HI _ GH H HI _ GH G % 3 $ H I q H G E G G7 % H

G " % G GL G G " O G I H G(R) GG

Jibra'il descended to the Prophet (SA) from heaven, smiling and rejoicing, and greeted
him with the words: "Peace be with you, O Muhammad!" He (SA) replied, "And peace
be with you, O Jibra'il!" Then he said: "Verily, Allah has sent a gift to you." Hence, he
(SA) asked, "What is that gift, O Jibra'il?" He answered, "Words from the Treasures of
the Throne. Allah honors you by them." The Prophet (SA) enquired, "What are they, O
Jibra'il?" He said: Say: O One who reveals beauty, and hides ugliness! O One who does
not punish the offender, and who does not ear the veil (from sins)! O Most Great in
pardoning! O Best of the Overlookers! O All-Embracing in Forgiveness! O One who
Opens His Hands in Mercy! O Hearer of all Whispers! O One whom all complaints are
made! (O Last Resort of the Fallen!). O Noble One! O Possessor of Great Favor! O One
who Blessed before anyone deserves it! O our Lord! O our Master! O our Guardian! O
Goal of our Desires! I beseech You, O Allah, not to make me ugly by means of the Fire.
The Messenger of Allah (SA) asked, "O Jibra'il! What are the virtues of these words?"
Jibra'il replied, So great! So great! The virtues of these words are impossible to
describe. Even if the angels from the seven heavens and the seven earths joined
together to describe the virtues of these words until the Day of Judgment, they would
not be able to describe even a thousandth part of them. Therefore, when a man says:
227

"O One who reveals beauty, and hides ugliness," Allah covers him up with His Mercy in
this world, and makes him beautiful in the Hereafter. Allah covers his defects with a
thousand veils in this world, and the Hereafter. When he says: "O One who does not
punish the offender, and does not tear the veil (from sins)," Allah will not hold him
accountable on the Day of Judgment, and on the Day all Veils are Torn, He will not tear
his veil. And when he says: "O Most Great in Pardoning," Allah will forgive his sins
even if they are as much as the foam from the sea. When he says: "O Best of the
Overlookers," Allah will forgive him even sins such as theft, drinking wine, worldly
frights, and other major sins. And when he says: "O All-Embracing in Forgiveness,"
Allah, the Mighty and High, will open seventy gates of Mercy to him in a way that he will
be overwhelmed by Allah, the Mighty and High's Mercy till he parts this world.
When he says: "O One who Opens His Hands in Mercy," Allah opens His Hands of
Mercy to him. And when he says: "O Hearer of all Whispers, O One to who all
Complaints are made," Allah will bestow upon him the reward of every afflicted,
unaffiliated, sick, blind, destitute, and poor person till the Day of Judgment.
When he says: "O Noble One," Allah will make him noble like the prophets. When he
says: "O Possessor of Great Favor," Allah will bestow upon him His Protection, and the
protection of the created on the Day of Judgment. And when he says: "O One who
gives blessings before anyone deserves it," Allah will grant him rewards equal to the
number of those who thanked Him for His Blessings. When he says: "O our Lord, O our
Master," Allah will say: "My angels! Bear witness that I forgave him, and I will give him
rewards similar to the numbers of those who are in Paradise, and Hell, the seven
heavens and the seven earths, the sun, the moon, the stars, rain drops, creatures,
mountains, pebbles, soil, and other than these, as well as the Empyrean and the
Throne. And when he says: "O our Guardian," Allah will fill his heart with faith. When he
says: "O Goal of our Desires," Allah will fulfill his desire, and give him the reward equal
to the reward of all the creatures on the Day of Judgment. And when he says: "I
beseech You, O Allah, not to make my being ugly by means of Fire," the Supreme, may
His glory be glorified, will say: My Servant has asked Me to free him from Fire. O My
angels! Bear witness that I set him, his parents, his brothers, his sisters, his household,
his children, and his neighbors free from the Fire, and accepted his intercession for a
thousand others who deserved punishment by fire, and saved them from it. O
Muhammad! Teach this supplication to the pious, and do not teach it to the hypocrites.
For it is supplication which will be granted to the ones that pronounce it, by the will of
Allah. This is the supplication of the inhabitants of the Flourishing House [al-Bayt alMa'mur], when they circumambulate it.
The Compiler of this book says: The proof that Allah - the Exalted, the Mighty, and the Most
High - is All-Knowing, Ever-Living, and All-Powerful in and of Himself - not by knowledge,
power, and life, that is other than Him - is that if He were All-Knowing by means of
knowledge, then His Knowledge could only be two things: eternal or created. If His Knowledge
is created then He, glorified be His Praise, was without knowledge before it creation. This is an
imperfect attribute, and every imperfection is caused, as we explained previously. If His
Knowledge is eternal, then it becomes necessary for other than Allah, the Mighty and High, to
be eternal. This is infidelity by consensus. The same argument can be applied to the AllPowerful and His Omnipotence and the Ever-Living and His Life. The proof that He, the
Exalted, has always been All-Powerful, All-Knowing and Ever-Living is that it has been proved
that He is All-Knowing, All-Powerful, and Ever-Living, in and of Himself. Hence, it is correct by
evidence that He, the Mighty and High, is Eternal. Therefore, He has always been All-Knowing
as Knowledge is part of His Essence, Which has always been. This indicates that He has
always been All-Powerful, and Ever-Living.

228

Chapter Thirty: Al-Qur'an Ma Huwa? What is the Qur'an? - 7
traditions

1. Ahmad Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamdani (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim
said, on the authority of his father Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Ali ibn Mabad, on
the authority of al-Husayn ibn Khalid that

.H H G ^ %H G E

I asked al-Rida Ali ibn Musa (AS): "O son of the Messenger of Allah! Tell me about the
Qur'an. Is it creator or created?" Therefore, he (AS) replied, "It is neither creator nor
created; rather it is the Word of Allah, the Might and High."
2. Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Masrur (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abd Allah ibn Jafar alHimyari said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the
authority of Al-Rayyan ibn al-Salt that

. C G G G G7 I 2 3 3 G ^ G $

I asked al-Rida (AS): "What do you say about the Qur'an?" Thus, he (AS) responded. "It
is the Word of Allah, do not exceed it, and do not seek guidance in other than it,
otherwise you will go astray."
3. Al-Husayn ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad al-Maaddab (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah
al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: Ali ibn Salim said, on the authority of his
father that

G7 G G % L E H }
G G 3 G%G G G% G G
G2 G%G 3d G H G

I enquired from al-Sadiq Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS): "O son of the Messenger of Allah!
What do you say about the Qur'an?" Hence, he responded, "It is the Word of Allah, His
Speech, His Book, the Revelation He revealed. It is the Honorable Book, which
229

falsehood shall not come to it from before it not from behind it; a revelation from the
Wise, the Praised One."
4. My father (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn
Isa ibn Ubayd al-Yaqtini that

m G " Z G Y I G m G (R) G G G

G O
G O

G ^ $

.

Ali ibn Muhammad ibn ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) wrote to some of his Shiites in
Baghdad: In the name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful. May Allah
guard us all from mischief! If He does, then it is a great bounty. And if He does not, then
it is a disaster. The argument regarding the Qur'an is an innovation [bidah] in which
both the questioner and the answerer is equally responsible. The questioner engages
into what he should not. And the answerer is constrained to answer what is incorrect.
There is no creator except Allah, the Mighty and High. Anything other than Him is
created. The Qur'an is Word of Allah. Do not make a name for it from your own self or
you will be led astray. May Allah count us among those who fear their Lord and those
who re apprehensive of the coming of the Hour (of Judgment).
5. Al-Husayn ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Hisham al-Mu'addab (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu
Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: Abd Allah ibn Ahmad said:
Sulayman ibn Jafar al-Jafari related to me that

.G ^ % H

m G G7 ~G" E % H G"
I asked Abu al-Hasan Musa ibn Jafar (AS): "O son of the Messenger of Allah! What do
you say about the dispute concerning the Qur'an? Some say it is created' while others
say it is not created.' Thus, he (AS) replied, "As for me, I do not say what they say. I
simply say that it is the Word of Allah."
6. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: Jafar ibn Sulayman al-Jafari said:
230

My father said, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn al-Fadl al-Hashimi, on the authority of Sad
al-Khaffaf, on the authority of al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah that

I G G EqG G C G GG G

G G G7 L H H G G L $ H ~
G 3

Gi G7 L G G L 2 G ~ $

L H G" Z L G H G

o

.

When the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abut Talib (AS) was facing the Khawarij
(rebels), admonishing them, reminding them, and cautioning them before the battle, he
warned them, "Do you want to take revenge from me? Beware! Verily, I was the first to
believe in Allah and His Messenger (SA)." They said:"You are as you claim, except you
made Abu Musa al-Ashari the arbitrator [Hakam] in the religion of Allah." Hence, he
(AS) responded: By Allah, I did not make any created being an arbitrator. Verily, I made
the Qur'an the arbitrator. Had I not, I would have been defeated in my affair and
opposed for my view. When I agreed to the battle between me and the enemies of Allah,
it was to raise the Word of Allah and help the Religion of Allah, even if the unbelievers
and the ignorant abhorred it.
The Compiler of this book explains: It has been mentioned in this book that the Qur'an is the
Word of Allah, His Revelation, His Speech, and His Book. What has not been mentioned in
this book is that it is created. We have indeed refrained from applying the word "created" to it,
because the word "created" literally may mean "made-up". It is saireated speech," i.e.
made-up. Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, says: You only worship idols besides Allah and
you create a lie, i.e. make up a lie. The Exalted has said regarding those who deny Divine
Unity: We never heard of this in the former faith; this is nothing but a forgery, i.e.
fabrication and a lie. Therefore, whoever believes that the Qur'an is created, in the meaning of
being made-up, he has disbelieved. On the other hand, whoever says that it is not created, in
the sense that it is not made-up, he is correct and has spoken the truth. Whoever believes that
it is uncreated, in the sense that it is not accidental, not revealed, and unprotected, then he is
mistaken and has said something false and inappropriate.
It is the consensus of all Muslims that the Qur'an is not metaphorically the Word of Allah, the
Mighty and High, but is literally the Word of Allah. Whoever says other than that, then he is in
denial and falsehood. If we examine the Qur'an, we find it to be elaborate: Some parts are
connected to others, some parts are disconnected, some verses come before others, for
example, so abrogators come later than the abrogated. Even if with this description it is not
accidental, then the evidence on the occurrence of the accidental beings would be void It
would be impossible to prove the One that caused it to be finite, separated and joined.
The other thing is that the intellect acknowledges that the Ummah has formed a consensus
that Allah, the Mighty and High, is Truthful in His Communications. As is well-known, a lie is to
communicate something which has not happened. Allah, the Mighty and High, cited the
statement of the Pharoah: I am your lord, the most high. He cited Nuh (AS) when he called
upon his son who did not want to join him: O my son! Embark with us and be not with the
231

unbelievers. Thus, if these statements and communications were eternal, then they existed
before the Pharoah, and before he said it; hence, they would not be informative. This is what a
lie is. However, if these words were not said until the Pharoah said them, they are accidental,
which means they came into existence from non-existence.
The other point is that Allah, the Mighty and High, says: And if We please, We should
certainly take away that which We have revealed to you. And His Word: Whatever
communications We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, We bring one better than it or
like it. Whatever has a likeness and whatever can vanish after existence is accidental.
7. The confirmation of this is of this is what our Shaykh Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad
ibn al-Walid (RA) has mentioned in his Jami; and said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn alHasan al-Saffar, on the authority of al-`Abbas ibn Marub that Abd al-Rahman ibn Abu Najran
related to me, on the authority of Hammad ibn Uthman, on the authority of Abd al-Rahim alQasir that

G L G G G 2 G G!" G G G G2 L 2

L 2 G G! G G L G (R) G"

G ^ $

G7 G G L G G~G dG G G G7
G H G (R) G G G G 2 G G G G
G ^

G L G (R) G G H G G

! 2 3 G G

G G G H G GG H qG G H G!" q 3 G
G G G H G G I G G G L d G G G G 2 q

I E G G IG G 2G G

G G I G GG G G Z H

Z G2 Z G ! o

G ! G E G ! E G ^ $

G G >
G _ G G G C H H
G ^ $

232

L d G G E H G G G G G 2

GH H G I H _ % 2 H H H G (R) G G G G G G G G

H G!" G GI G G H G " {
_ G G G Z G Z {

H GLH { 3 G (R) G Y G G7 2 H H H G
G Y G G G H G d

_ G G 2 G G H G G {

G G G E G Z G Y G
3 G IG G H H _ H G I %

% 3 I L H { 3 Y G G (R) G

m I G G 2 H G H G L H { 3 G G%G L 2 _ GH

_ G G % 2 H { 3 G % G
G G H 3 G q G {

G H ! 2 G q GG H G G L d Y G I G

>

G%G G ! 2 3

G % G m H ! G 2 G

H G7 G H q H G H H G

G % G m H ! L G H % G x % G H 2 G G G
G _ G G " G G G G G L d G H G $

2 Z G 2 E G % G G G qG G
Ga G G O2 G E G2 G 2 G (R)
G G m G G 2 G Z G

G G % Z G G G G Z G
I H H GH Ga G G O G E G

3 G (R) G G G% Z G

G G!"G G G G G Z G G G G

233

G d Z G2 G7 d 2 H {

.. GH G!" % L A

I wrote to Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) and sent it with Abd al-Malik ibn Ayun:
May I be your ransom! I write to you regarding matters in which people have differed. If
you seem it appropriate, may Allah take me as your ransom, then please answer me.
The people of Iraq have differed regarding recognition and denial. May I be your
ransom, are they created? They have also differed regarding the Qur'an. One group
claims that the Qur'an is the uncreated Word of Allah, and the other group claims that it
is the created Word of Allah. As regards ability, does it take place before the action or
does it occur simultaneously along with the action? Our Companions have differed
about it, all quoting traditions to support their views. As regards Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, can He be described by means of an image? If you deem it fitting, please
respond to me in writing with the correct position regarding Divine Unity, whether
motion is created or uncreated, and with the definition of faith. Hence, he (AS) wrote
and sent it back with Abd al-Malik ibn Ayun: You asked about the nature of
recognition. Then know, may Allay have mercy on you, that recognition was created by
Allah, the Mighty and High, and placed in the heart of the created, and denial was
created by Allah, and placed in the hearts of the created. The only control that servants
have over these two is choice. Hence, if they yearn for faith, they recognize Allah, and
become believers. However, if they yearn for infidelity, they deny Allah and become
unbelievers who are led astray. Whoever embraces faith, Allah grants him success. And
whoever rejects faith is forsaken by Allah. If Allah punishes or rewards them it is due to
the choices they made. You asked, may Allah have mercy on you, about the dispute
that people have concerning the Qur'an. They say that the Qur'an, is the Word of Allah,
that it is accidental, that it is uncreated, and that it is not eternal alongside Allah, may
His Remembrance be Exalted. Exalted is Allah, the Elevated, and the Great, from such
things! Allah, the Mighty and high, existed when nothing other than Him was known or
unknown. The Mighty and High existed when there was no speaker, no intender, no
mover, and no doer. High and Mighty is our Lord. The Qur'an is the Word of Allah, and
is not created. It contains information of those who came before you and those who will
come after you. It was revealed by Allah to Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, peace
and salutations be upon him and his progeny. You also asked, may Allah have mercy
on you, about the ability to act. Allah the Mighty and High, created the servant. He
places in the servant the ability, the health, and the strength to act. Nothing moves
without action. Movement and desire are qualities which Allah created and placed in
human beings. Hence, when a human being desires something, he wishes it. It is for
this reason that the human being is called "the intender." If a human being intends to
complete an action, he does so by means of ability and motion. It is for this reason that
the servant is called "the one with ability" and "the one who moves." Therefore, even
when the human being is still, and does not wish to complete an action, he possesses
the ability to act due to health, strength, and motion. Hence, stillness is an action: the
action of refraining to act. Hence, it is said: "the one that is still," is attributed with
"stillness." Therefore, when a human being desires to act, he does so by means of the
strength which he posses. Hence, it is said that he is: "the doer," "the mover," "the
acquirer" and "the one who is able." Do you not see that these are all human
attributes? You also asked, may Allah have mercy on you, about divine Unity and the
views of your companions on that subject. Exalted is Allah, who has nothing
whatsoever like unto Him. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing. Exalted is Allah from
234

the descriptions of the anthropomorphist who compare Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
with His Creatures, attributing lies to Allah, the Mighty and High. Point out, may Allah
have mercy on you, that the correct position regarding Divine Unity is to be found in the
Attributes of Allah, the Mighty and High, which were revealed in the Qur'an. Do not
apply annulment or anthropomorphism to Allah. He cannot be described by means of
negation or anthropomorphism. Allah is the Firm, the Existent. Exalted is Allah from the
descriptions of the describers. Do not stray from the Qur'an otherwise you will stray
after clarity has reached you. You also asked, may Allah have mercy on you, about
faith. Faith is confirmation with the tongue, agreement with the heart, and action with
the limbs. Some parts of the faith are interconnected with the others. Sometimes a
servant can be a Muslim before being faithful [mu'min], but he is never faithful until he
is a Muslim. Therefore, Islam is before faith and it combines with the faith. Hence, when
a servant commits a major or minor sin, which Allah the Mighty and High, has
forbidden, then he leaves the circle of faith. He loses the title of faithful, while the tile of
Islam remains with him. If he repents and seeks forgiveness, he returns to the status of
faith, and if he does not return to disbelief and denial. If he says that the permissible is
forbidden or that the forbidden is permissible, he leaves both the circle of faith and
Islam, and enters into disbelief. He has the same rank as a man who enters the Holy
Mosque in Mecca, enters the Ka'bah and the Holy Mosque. He is then killed, and goes
straight to Hell.
The Compiler of this Book explains: the purpose of this tradition is to prove that the words of
the Qur'an have not been created or made-up. It does not mean that the Qur'an is not
accidental, because he who (AS) said: "accidental, not created, and not sempiternal with
Allah, may His Remembrance be Exalted."

235

Chapter Thirty-One: Mana Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. The
Meaning of "In the Name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most
Merciful" - 5 traditions

1. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Taliqani (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn Said master of the Bani Hashim reported to us, on the authority of Ali ibn
al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Fuddal, on the authority of his father that

G G G Z G OG Y G G G G G G O G G G G
>

_ % L 2G G I H H G
.

I asked al-Rida Ali ibn Musa (AS) about the meaning of Bismillah: He (AS) said: "The
meaning of the statement Bismillah is `I mark myself with one of the traits of Allah, the
Mighty and High' and that is true service." I asked him, "What is al-simah?"
Therefore, he (AS) replied, "It is the mark."
2. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad,
on the authority of al-Qasim ibn Yahya, on the authority of his grandfather al-Hasan ibn
Rashid, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Sinan that

G H G G G G G2 L d
H GG G G H G%G G G G H E 4 _ % G " G

I asked Abut Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the meaning of Bismillah al-Rahman alRahim; hence, he (AS) responded, The Ba * is the brilliance {baha] of Allah. The sin * is
the splendor [sama] of Allah. The mim * is the magnificence [majd] of Allah, and some
have related that it is the Kingdom [mulk] of Allah. Allah is the God of Everything. AlRahman is the Beneficent to all His creation, an al-Rahim is the One who is Merciful to
the Believes specifically.
3. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of al-Abbas ibn Maruf, on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on
the authority of the person who told him that

236

G H G G G G % H G G2 G
L % G G " H G G GG H G G%G G $

G H L G G G G H L E H $ Z H

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked about the meaning of Bismillah al-Rahman alRahim.
Thus, he (AS) answered: The ba * is the brilliance [baha] of Allah. The sin * is the
splendor [sana] of Allah. And the min * is the Kingdom [mulk] of Allah."
I asked, "What about Allah?"
He (AS) replied, "The A * is the blessins [ala] of Allah over His Creatures from the
bounty of our Guardianship [wilayah]. The l * is the obligation of our Guardianship
which Allah demand of His Creation.
I further asked, "And the h *?"
He (AS) answered, "It stands for the abasement of those who oppose Muhammad and
his Progeny, blessings of Allah be upon them."
I enquired, "What about al-Rahman?"
He (AS) responded, "Beneficent for the entire universe."
I asked, "And al-Rahim?"
He (AS) replied, "The Most Merciful towards the Believers specifically."
4. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Salamah ibn al-Khattab,
on the authority of al-Qasim ibn Yahya, on the authority of his grandfather al-Hasan ibn alRashid that

. H ! G % d : }

I asked Abu al-Hasan Musa ibn Jafar (AS) about the meaning of Allah. He (AS)
answerd, "He overwhelms both the mighty and subtle."
5. Muhammad ibn al-Qasim al-Jurjani the Commentator (of the Qur'an) said: Abu Yaqub
Yusuf ibn Muhammad ibn Ziyad; and Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Sayyar, both were
Imami Shiah through their parents, said.

H G G O G d G H GG H

G H G G G H H G G G
G G G m G G G G
G 2 G C % _ G G H G G Y G E

G " GG % H G " 2G C G 3 G H GG I _ G G

237

G H G GH G G G G HG

Y G 2G G 3 G G 3/4
G I Y C Z G L 2 G
G H Y G G _ G G G Z H G 2 H I

G G G 1/4 G G G

G n

G 3

G H G G G G%G3 G G GG % G% G H ! 2 3

G H G G G G~G G G _ G G!"
G G G G~G GG G Z H GG G G G%G G G%G G

Gx2 G H G H H G G G H G " GG H

G%G H G G%G H m

G 2 G C % G G G G H G G Y G E C GGO
I H G(R) % GO > % G G " IG E _
C G G G7 E O_ H H G

G I G m G O G G G I G m G O

U
G G!" % H x G " 3

H 3 G 3

3

3 G

G7 H G!" ~G" G G!"

I C G G2G G H H

d3 E _ G7 H !G(R) LE _ G7 G HG2 H G E _

C d GO G " G G m > G " G G G m G >

_ ! G
G H G G G GE E G E _ G G G A

G " GG G G G 2G C G G H GGG
G H G H Ga G " q

238

G G G7 G GG H G _ G 2 G

G H G G G % G H G%GO G GC G
H 2 G
G%_ G % C m H G "
G 2 m G
C G H G " G G " G
. GG G G G G% #

Al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Muhammad (AS) was asked about the word of Allah, the Mighty
and High, Bismallah al-Rahman al-Rahim [In the Name of Allah, the Most
Compassionate, the Most Merciful]. He replied: Allah is He in whom all take refuge in
times of need and difficulty after having lost hope in all but Him, and after having
broken relations from all but Him. A person says: In the name of Allah' i.e. I seek help
in all my affairs from Allah, the Only One worthy of service. He is the Helper when help
is sought. He is the Answerer when He is called upon. It is also what al-Sadiq (AS) said
to an man when asked: "O son of the Messenger of Allah! Those who debate with me
have confused me. Guide me to Allah. What is He?" Hence, he (AS) replied to him, "O
servant of Allah! Have you ever ridden a boat? The man said: "Of course." The Imam
(AS) responded, "Then did it ever sink, leaving you without a boat to rescue you, and
insufficient strength to swim? He answered, "Yes." The Imam (AS) asked, "At that
moment, did you heart have faith in something. All-Powerful that could rescue you from
your difficult situation?" Thus, the man replied, "Certainly." Al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Then
that thing is Allah, the All-Powerful, the One who Rescues when there is no rescuer,
and the One who helps when no help is available." Al-Sadiq (AS) then added,
Sometimes, some our Shiites forget to begin their action with "In the Name of Allah,
the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful." As a result, He tries them with mishaps to
caution them to be grateful to Him, the Blessed and Exalted, so that they may praise
Him, and so that they may learn that it is a mistake to leave out the statement "In the
Name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful. Al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn
Muhammad (AS) further said: "A man stood up before Ali ibn al-Husayn (AS) and
asked, "Inform me about the meaning of In the name of Allah, the Most
Compassionate, the Most Merciful." Consequently, Ali ibn al-Husayn (AS) replied,
My father related to me, on the authority of his brother, al-Hasan, on the authority of his
father, the Commander of the Faithful (AS) that a man stood before him and asked: "O
Commander of the Faithful, inform me about the meaning of In the name of Allah, the
Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful.'" Thus, he (AS) responded, "Verily, the word
Allah' is the greatest of the names of Allah, the Mighty and High. It is a name that
cannot be given to other than Allah. Creatures are not named by it." At that time a man
enquired that what is the explanation of the word "Allah?" The Commander of the
Faithful (AS) explained, Allah is He in whom all take refuge in times of need and
difficulty, after having lost hope in all other but Him, and after breaking ties with all
other than Him. Regardless of how great, powerful, and wealthy a leader may be in this
world, and regardless of how much others depend on him, there will always be things
239

over which they leader has no power. Likewise, the leader himself may have needs that
he cannot fulfill. Hence, in moments of need, he breaks away from all others, and turns
towards Allah until his problem is resolved. And then he returns to his previous
infidelity. Do you not hear the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: Say: Tell me if the
chastisement of Allah should overtake you or the hour should come upon you, will you
call (on others) besides Allah, if you are truthful? Nay, Him you call upon, so He clears
away that for which you pray if He pleases and you forget what you set up (with Him).
Hence, Allah, the Mighty and High, says to His Servants: O those in need of My Mercy, I
have indeed compelled you to turn to Me for all your needs, and at all times, in
complete submission. Therefore, rush towards Me for mercy in every endeavor you
seek to commence, and which you seek to complete. Verily, if I intend to give you
something, no one has the power to prevent Me. And If I intend to deny you something,
no one has the power to give it to you. I am the Most Worthy of your supplications, and
the Most Worthy of your implorations. Therefore, say at the commencement of every
action, both small and big: "In the Name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most
Merciful" [Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim], i.e. I seek help in this matter from Allah, the
Sole Worthy of Service. He is the Helper when help is sought. He is the Answerer when
He is called upon. He is the Most Compassionate, the Provider of sustenance. He is the
Most Merciful in this world and the Hereafter. He made this religion easy and simple for
us. He has shown mercy towards us by distinguishing us from His Enemies. He (AS)
then added, The Messenger of Allah (AS) said: Whoever is distressed in pursuit of any
activity and says: "In the name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful,"
sincerely, embracing it in his heart, then one of two outcomes will take place: either his
wish will be fulfilled in this world, or it will be granted to him by His Lord in the next
world. And whatever lies with Allah is better and more permanent for the Believers.

240

Chapter Thirty - Two: Tafsir Huruf al-Mujam. The Explanation of
the Letters of the Alphabet. 2 traditions

1. Muhammad ibn Bakran al-Naqqash (may Allah have mercy on him) said in Kufah that
Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Hamdani said: Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Fuddal, on the authority
of his father that

G % G%G _ G H H H H G " : _

G% m G%G G G 2 G G m % H Z G G%G U
G G " H H G " G

GG G G G _ G%G G GH I G G m G G

H G Ga2 G I 2 G $

G >
G 3 H

G G G G G H G H E H G $ GG O G
H H H G G Ga G o

G G G2G G G I G G

G G G G G G2G G G

H G G G GGH G 2 G *
G H G G7 G G G G H m

G G G G% G H _ G G G G G Z G%G

G G G G IG O G7

O G G 3 H

G H G " L 2 G E Y C 3 % H

241

G G%G G H % L 2 H G " Z G I E 2 G
G G G G I H G " % G " E G

G m H ! %2 G _ G

! 2 3
G GG 3d C G G GL G G H G G I

Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) said: Verily, the first thing that Allah, the Mighty
and High, created, in order to teach His Creation, was the alphabet. When someone is
hit over the head so hard that he loses the ability to speak properly, the law decrees
that he must be presented the letters of the alphabet. The extent of the compensation
the culprit must pay is based on the number of letters of the alphabet which the victim
of the assault cannot pronounce. My father related to me, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of his grandfather, on the authority of the Commander of the Faithful
(AS) that he said about the alphabet:
The Letter * [alif] "a" * stands for Allah's Blessings [ala]; the letter * [ba] "b" stands for
Allah's Joy [bahjat] (also for the Ever-Remaining and the Originator of the Heavens and
the Earth); the letter * [ta] "t" stands for the completion of the affairs through the Rise
from the Progeny of Muhammad (SA); the letter * [tha] "th" stands for the reward
[thawab] for the good deeds of the believers.
The letter * [jim] "j" stands for Allah's Exaltation [jamal] and Glory [jalal]; the letter * [ha]
"h" stands for Allah's Forbearance [hilm] towards sinners (it also stands for the EverLiving, the Truth, and the Forbearing); the letter * [kha] "kh" stands for the
sluggishness of the disobedient ones in the presence of Allah, the Mighty and High.
The letter * [dal] "d" stands for Allah's Religion [din] (which He has approved for His
servants); and the letter * [dhal] "dh" stands for the Lord of Glory and Honor [dhil jalal
wa-al-ikram].
The letter * [ra] "r" stands for the Affectionate [al-Ra'uf] and the Most Merciful [alRahim]; and the letter * [za] "z" stands for Shaking on the Day of Judgment.
The Letter * [sin] "s" stands for Allah's Luminance [sana] (and His Eternity); and the
letter * [shin] "sh" stands for Allah's Wish, whatever He wished and Intention, whatever
He intended. And you do not wish except that Allah wishes.
The letter * [sad] "s" stands for the One whose Promise is True [Sadiq al-Wad] in
carrying the people over the Bridge [Sirat], and imprisoning the oppressors in the Hell;
and the letter * [dad] "d" stands for the loss [dil] of whoever opposes Muhammad (SA)
and his Progeny (AS).
The letter * [ta] "t" stands for the Prosperity [tuba] and Good Ending for the Believes;
and the letter * [za] z' stands for the optimism of the Believers about Allah and the
pessimism of the unbelievers in Allah.
The letter * [ayn] "a" stands for the Omniscient [Alim]; and the letter * [ghayn] "gh"
stands for the Self-Sufficient [al-Ghani], who is absolutely never in need.
The letter * [fa] "f" stands for the (the Splitter [al-Faliq] of the seeds and fruit kernels,
and for) flame from the flames of the Fire; and the letter * [qaf] "q" stands for the Qur'an
whose compilation and recitation depends upon Allah. Ther letter * [kaf] "k" stands for
242

the Sufficient [al-Kafi]; and the letter * [lam] "l" stands for the absurdity [laghw] of the
unbelievers in the lies which they ascribe to Allah.
The letter * [mim] "m" stands for the Sovereignty of Allah on the Day of Judgment, on
the Day on which there will be no other sovereignty. Allah, the Mighty and High, says:
To whom belongs the Kingdom this Day? At that time the spirits of His Prophets,
Messengers and Proofs (AS) will speak and say: To Allah, the One, the Subduer (of All).
Thus, Great be His Glory will respond: This Day every soul shall be rewarded for what it
has earned; no injustice (shall be done) this day; surely Allah is quick in reckoning.
And the letter * [nun] "n" stands for Allah's favour [nawal] for the believes and His
Punishment [nakal] for the unbelievers.
The letter * [wa'u] "w" stands for the affliction [wayl] with the punishment of the Day of
Judgment for the ones who disobey Allah; and the letter * [ha'] "h" stands for the
insignificance of those who disobey Allah.
The letter * [la] "la" as in [la ilaha illa Allah] "there is no god but Allah," is the
expression of sincere devotion. There is no servant who says it sincerely except
Paradise becomes incumbent upon him.
Finally the letter * [ya] "y" stands for Allah's hand which is expanded over all His
creatures for sustenance. Glorified and Exalted is He from what the polytheists profess.
He (AS) then said:
Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, revealed this Qur'an with these letters, which all
the Arabs use, and then challenged: Say: if men and jinn should combine together to
bring the like of this Qur'an, they could not bring the like of it, thought some of them
were aiders of others.
2. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Muqri al-Hakim said: Abu Amr Muhammad
ibn Jafar al-Muqri al-Jurjani said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Musili said in
Baghdad that Muhammad ibn Asim al-Tarifi said: Abu Zayd Ayyash ibn Yazid ibn al-Hasan
ibn Ali al-Kahhal, the freed slave of Zayd ibn Ali, said: Abu Yazid ibn al-Hasan related to me
that Musa ibn Jafar related to me, on the authority of his father that
Al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) said:

G7 G O % EqG G C G GG G G _ G H G!" G I

G EqG G C G _ % _ H I H % 2 G E G G G
G%G G Ga2 2 H C C H G " % G"

G H L_ 2 G O L G
2 m H H H H
H G I H L H H G H

H H G o G G H H

m G G2

G 2 H H G G2G G

H H H G G G G G G7 G H H GG

243

G H G G2G G G H G%G3 G GI G

G >

G H H G%G G E I I H G G H G%G

H G O G H G G%G G G H % (c)

A Jewish person came to the Prophet (SA) while the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn
Abu Talib (AS) was with him and asked: "What is the meaning of the letters of the
alphabet?
Thus, the Messenger of Allah (SA) said to Ali (AS), "Answer him, and prayed: O Allah,
grant him success and show him the right way."
Therefore, Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) explained, "There is not a letter of the alphabet that
does not stand for a name of Allah, the Mighty and High."
He then added,
The letter * [alif] "a" stand for "Allah, besides whom there is no god, the Ever-Living,
the Self-Subsisting;"
The letter * [ba] "b" stands for "the Ever-Remaining even after the end of the creation;"
The letter * [ta] "t" stands for "the Oft-Returning (in mercy) who accepts the repentance
from His Servants;"
The letter * [tha] "th" stands for "the Firm Creator," Allah confirms those who believe
with the sure word in this world's life.
The letter * [jim] "j" stands for "high is His praise, and sacred are His Names;"
The letter * [ha] "h" stands for "the Truth [haqq], the Ever-Living [hai], and he
Forbearing [halim];"
The letter * [kha] "kh" stands for "the All-Informed of what the servants to;"
The letter * [dal] "d" stands for "the Rewarder of the Day of Judgment."
And the letter * [dhal] "dh" stands for "the Lord of glory and Honor" [dhul jalal wa-alikram].
The letter * [ra] "r" stands for "the Affectionate towards His Servants;"
And the letter * [za] "z" stands for "the Beauty of the worshipped."
The letter * [sin] "s" stands for "the All-Hearing and All-Seeing;"
The letter * [shin] "sh" stands for "the Thankful to His Believing Servants;"
The letter * [sad] "s" stands for "the Most Truthful in His Promise [wad] and threat
[waid];"
And the letter * [dhad] "d" stands for "the Punisher [dar] and the Beneficial."
The letter * [ta] "t" stands for "the Pune [Tahir] and the One who Purifies;"
The letter * [za] "z" stands for "the Manifested and the One that Manifests His Signs;"
The letter * [ayn] "" stands for "the All-Knowing of His Servants;"
244

And the letter * [ghayn] "gh" stands for "the Aid of all those from His Creation who seek
help."
The letter * [fa] "f" stands for "the Splitter of the seeds and fruit kernels;"
The letter * [qaf] "q" stands for "the All-Powerful over all of His Creation;"
The letter * [kaf] "k" stands for "the Sufficient who there is non like unto Him and He
begets not, nor is He begotten;"
The letter * [lam] "l" stand for "the Kind over His servants;"
The letter * [mim] "m" stands for "the Master of sovereignty;"
The letter * [nun] "n" stands for "the light of heavens from the Light of His Throne;"
The letter * [wa'u] "w" stands for "the One [Wahid], the Uique and the Needless, who
begets not, nor is He begotten;"
The letter * [ha] "h" stands for "the guide for His Creation;"
The letter * [la] "la" stands for "there is no god but Allah;"
And finally the letter * [ya] stands for Allah's Hand which Extends over all His
Creatures."
Then the Messenger of Allah (SA) responded, "Allah, the Mighty and High, is pleased
with this answer." Consequently, the Jewish man accepted Islam.

245

Chapter Thirty-Three: Tafsir Huruf al-Jummal. The Explanation of
the Letters of the Alphabet According to Their Numerical Value - 2
traditions

1. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq (may Allah be pleased with him) said: Ahmad ibn
Muhammad al-Hamdani, the freed slave of the Hashimites, said: Jafar ibn Abd Allah ibn
Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib said: Kathir ibn Ayyash al-Qittan said, on the
authority of Abu al-Jarud Ziyad ibn al-Mundhir that

G G G % 3 G > E I G 2

G % 3

G H G G G _ % G _

G 3 % OG

H G " G 3 L G " GA

G! 3/4

_ 3/4

H G G G I 2 G $

G G G GLH _ H I G H GH G G

G G G G G I H _ I

Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Baqir (AS) said:
When Jesus son of Mary [Isa ibn Maryam] (AS) was born, he was a day old; however,
he looked to be two months old. When he turned seven months old, his mother took
him to the teachers of script. She placed him before the teacher, so the teacher said to
him: "Say: In the Name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful."
Thus, Isa (AS) sain the name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most
Merciful."
Then the teacher said to him: "Say: Abjad (the alphabet)."
So Isa (AS) lifted his head and asked, "Do you know what abjad is?" Hence, the
teacher picked up a lash to hit him.
Therefore, Isa (AS) responded, "O teacher, do not hit me. If you do not know the
maning, ask me, and I shall it explain it to you."
Thus, the teacher replied, "Explain it to me."
Isa (AS) explained:
The letter [alif] "a" stands for Allah's Blessings; the letter [ba] "b" stands for Allah's
Joy; the letter [jim] "j" stands for Allah's Exaltation; the letter [dal] "d" stands for
246

Allah's Religion. In hawwaz, the letter [ha] "h" stands for the terror of Hell; the letter
[wa'u] "w" stands for the affliction for the ones in the Fire; and the letter [zai] "z"
stands for the moaning of Hell. Hutti is for diminishing the mistakes from the seekers of
forgiveness. Kaliman is the Word of Allah, there is none that can alter His words. Safas
is tit for tat and recompense for recompense. Qarashat is that He assembles them then
resurrects them.
The teacher then saiady! Take you son away. He is already learned, and is not in
need of a teacher."
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSafar said: Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab; and Ahmad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn
Fuddal said, on the authority of Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Zayd that
Muhammad ibn Salim related to me, on the authority of Asbagh ibn Nubatah that

G G G G G I E G G I H q
G G%G H G (R) G

G G H G H G I 2 2 H G%GO

GH G G H G G G I I H H G

G _ H H I G m G G H G7 H G G H H
I H H G G G!" G G O

L 2 3 G H G G G I H G " G%G G IG Y H H I A

G m H ! % 2 G%G G H G IG Z _ G _ G G

G H G G (R) H H Z G%G G G 3 G >

H GH G H G _ G7 I
G H I G GH G 3 G

m G C H m G H

G G G m E G E G H H Z x
H I m

G G G G!" Y I G m L H G 2G G Z G

G 3
.

The Commander of the Faithful said: Uthman ibn Affan asked the Messenger of Allah
(SA) about the explanation of the alphabet according to their numerical value.
247

Therefore, the Messenger of Allah (SA) responded, "Learn the explanation of the
alphabet according to its numerical value, for verily, it contains wonders. Shame on the
learned who ignore its meaning."
Hence, it was asked: "What is the explanation of the alphabet?"
Then he (SA) explained,
As for the letter [alif], it stands for the Blessings of Allah. It is a letter from the letters of
His Names.
The letter [ba] stands for Allah's Joy;
The letter [jim] stands for Allah's Paradise, His Glory and Exaltation;
The letter [dal] sands for Allah's Religion.
As for hawwaz, then the letter [ha] stands for the burning abyss, so affliction is for the
ones who are cast in Hell;
The letter [wa'u] stands for the affliction for the ones in the Fire;
And the letter [zai] stands for a corner of Hell, thus, we seek refuge in Allah from what
is in the corner.
As for Hutti, then the letter [ha] is for the diminishing of the mistakes from the seekers
of forgiveness in the Night of Power [laylat al-qadr], and what Jibra'il brings down with
the angels till the break of the morning;
The letter [ta] stands for the Prosperity [tuba], the good End for the believers. It [tuba] is
a tree which Allah, the Mighty and High, has planted, and in which He has breathed His
Spirit. Verily, its branches are noticeable from behind the enclosure of Paradise. It
brings forth pieces of jewellery and drinks ready to fall down unto their mouths;
The letter [ya] stands for Allah's Hand which is expanded over all His Creatures.
Glorified and Exalted is He, opposed to what the polytheists profess.
As for Kaliman, then the letter [kaf] stands for Allah's Word, "there is none who can
alter His Words; and you shall not find any refuge besides Him."
The letter [lam] stands for the acquaintance [ilmam] of the ones in Paradise with each
other in meeting, greeting and salutations, and gathering [talawum] of the ones in Hell
with what they have between themselves.
The letter [mim] stands for the Sovereignty of Allah, which never declines and the
Endlessness of Allah, which never perishes.
The letter [nun] stands for "Nun. I swear by the Pen and what they (the Angels) write."
Hence, the pen is from light and the book is from light in the guarded tablet, which the
close ones witness and Allah suffices as a witness.
As for Safas, then it is tit for tat and precious stone for a precious stone, i.e.
recompense for recompense and as you sow so shall you reap. Verily, Allah does not
intend oppression for the servants.
As for Qarashat, it means that Allah assembles them, then resurrects them, and revives
them on the Day of Judgment. He then judges them with righteousness, and they shall
not be oppressed in the least.

248

Chapter Thirty-Four: Tafsir Huruf al-Adhan wa al-Iqamat. The
Explanation of the Words of the Calls to Prayer - 2 traditions

1. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Marwazi al-Hakim al-Muqri' said: Abu Amr
Muhammad ibn jafar al-Muqri' al-Jurjani said: Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Musili
said in Baghdada that Muhammad ibn Asim al-Tarifi said: Abu Zayd Ayyash ibn Yazid ibn alHasan ibn Ali al-Kahhal freed slave of Zayd ibn Ali said: My father Yazid ibn al-Hasan related
tome that Musa ibn Jafar related to me on the authority of his father Jafar ibn Muhammad, on
the authority of his father Muhammad ibn Ali, on the authority of his father Ai ibn al-Husayn
that his father

EqG G C G GG G Y2 _ G G " G G G7 Z H

3 _

G _ H I G G E G%G G Z G 2 Z G G m

G%G G G%G3 G%G3H G%G G G G%G G m

G G % G H m % H G(R) _
E 4 _ GH E 4 _ #
G E 4 _ 2 H G

G G~H E % E 4 C Ga2 I C E 4 _

G%G3 G C G m G m E 4 _ G

2

% m HG(R) Z G" I _ G G O %3 G%G3 G C G G%G G

_ m O m % H d m % H d m m % H d G%G o

% G o

G G G C m % H d G x G%G #

249

H G%G G G!" G%G G G2G C G C m % H d #

H H dG G (R) H G " % G " I %
H G " 2 % H m % H d qG G E G G H G " 3 I

C G H H G G GE 2 H H H H
_ G 1/4 H G " G G d % H I

H G " % G " I ~dG
G I H G " G! G H G " G I H G " % G " I

H >

H 2 G H G " G I ~dG E G Eq _

G Z H H I % H G C 2

G H G!" % % C G % GC % C G % 2 Z H H H G " % G " I ~ G I m

>

G o

G G GH _ Z H H I ~ G
G H G G O G _GH G

G G!" H G " E G!" E G I m G Z H H I G G H G H G7

G H G!" Z H %H G GG O G G2G C G % H % 2 Z

Z G H I H H % G%G G n
Z G G R)G G G!" G

!G" G _ G G G G!" C G H H I % H Z I

_ G G G G G G G GI 3 G G G G" _ G E }

G m G3 _
G!" G H H I G G H G H G G!"G C H G%G G G7 G

_ G G%G H G%G G H 3 _ G3
>
o

250

% H G(R) G H I % H G G7 G G O

E G!" G2 m
G!" % Y GE Y G!" I > E G!" I E %

E G!" % E G!" % E G!" % E

E H G!" % H E G G!" I E H G G!" % ZG G!" I G Y E I G!"
H I G G H G H G7 ! G #

GG G G _ _ G G H G GG G n
G G G!" 3 G!" G m % H G(R) G
E G G E G G G7 E H G G G7 G GG Y
m % H G(R) % H E G

2 %
G G % % E 2 G G n
G G G%G G m G C
% G%G G H d G%G G % 2H G o

2 m G C m % H G(R) G G G H G O G%GO

2 %

G G 2 G%GO G O G G

C G G I G 2 H G" % G " % H n

n
C % % H G% I G E G

G G G7 H GL G2G

G!" H H G G!" G G G G O G

Al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) said:
We were sitting in the Mosque when the muezzin [al-mu'dhdhin] went to the minaret
and said: "Allah is the Greatest" [Allahu Akbar] twice. The Commander of the Faithful
Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) started to weep, which caused us to weep as well. Therefore,
when the muezzin finished, Ali (AS) asked, "Do you know the inner meaning of the call
to prayer made by the muezzin?"
251

We all replied, "All, His Messenger (SA), and His Successor, know best."
So he (AS) explained,
If you knew the meaning of the words of the call to prayer, you would laugh little and
weep much. The statement "Allah is the Greatest" has many meanings.
When the muezzin says "Allah is Greatest" it refers to His Eternity, His Sempiternity,
His Infinity, His Knowledge, His Power, His Omnipotence, His Forbearance, His
Munificence, His Generosity, His Bounty, and His Pride. When the muezzin says "Allah
is the Greatest" he proclaims that the Creation and the Command belong to Allah. He
proclaims that creation came about as a result of His Will. He proclaims that creation
comes from Him, and will return to Him. He proclaims that He is the First of the First as
He has always existed, and that He is the Last of the Last as He will always exit. He
proclaims that He is the Manifest, who cannot be perceived, and that He is the Hidden,
who is not subject to limitations of any sort. He proclaims that He is the Ever-Lasting,
and that everything but Him will perish.
The second meaning of "Allah is the Greatest" refers to the fact that He is All-Knowing,
the All-Informed, who knows everything that has occurred and everything that will
occur, even before it occurs.
The third meaning of "Allah is the Greatest" is that He is All-Powerful over everything.
His Power extends over everything. He is Powerful due to His Power, and the Potent
One over His Creation. He is Powerful in Essence. His Power embraces all things. When
He decrees a thing, He only says to it, "Be", and it is.
The fourth "Allah is the Greatest" refers to His Forbearance and Generosity. He
forbears as if He were unaware of the sin, pardons as if He did no see the sin, and
covers with mercy as if He had not been disobeyed. He does not hasten punishment
out of His Generosity, Forgiveness, and Forbearance.
Another meaning of "Allah is the Greatest" is that He is Generous, Ample-Giving, and
the Most Munificent. The other meaning of "Allah is the Greatest" is to negate His
Shape, and that Allah is Greater than any of His Attributes. Verily, those who describe
Allah describe him on the basis of their own ability and not according to His Might and
Majesty. Exalted is Allah, the Elevated, the Great, from what the attributers perceive as
His Attributes.
Another meaning of "Allah is the Greatest" refers to the fact that Allah is the Most High
and Exalted. He is Self-Sufficient from His Servants. He is not in need of the deeds of
His Creation.
As for his statement: "I bear witness that there is no god but Allah" [ashhadu an la ilaha
illa Allah], it declares that no profession of faith is permissible unless it comes
sincerely from the heart. A sincere profession of faith is recognition that there is no one
worthy of service but Allah, the Mighty and High, and refusing to serve other than Allah,
the Mighty and High. My tongue confesses to my heart's belief that there is no god but
Allah. And I bear witness that there is no refuge from Allah except through Allah. And
that there is no security from the evil of all evil doers and from the mischief of all
mischief mongers, except with Allah.
The second time that "I bear witness that there is no god but Allah" is proclaimed, it
means: I bear witness there is no guide except Allah, and that there is no Guide but
Allah. I bear witness to Allah that there is no god but Allah. And I call upon all the
inhabitants of the heavens and the earth, and whatever is between them, including
angels and human beings; and I call upon the mountains, the trees, the animals that are
mounted, and the animals which are wild, and all that is wet and dry, that there is no
Creator but Allah, and that there is no Sustainer, no One served, no Punisher, no
Helper, no Seizer of Souls, no Extender, no Provider, no Preventer, no Defender, no
Admonisher, no Sufficient, n o Cure, no Preceder, and no Final Destination except
252

Allah. To Him belongs the Creation and the Command. In His Hand is all goodness.
Blessed be Allah, the Lord of the Worlds!
As for his statement: "I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah"
[ashhadu anna Muhammadan Rasul Allah], it proclaims that: I bear witness to Allah that
there is no god but Him, and that Muhammad (SA) is His Servant, Messenger, and
Prophet, as well as the Sincere Bearer of His Secret. He sent him to all mankind with
guidance, with the Religion of Truth and He might make it prevail over all other
religions, no matter how much the polytheists may detest it. I bear witness to whoever
is in the heaves and the earth, to the Prophets, Messengers, angels, and all mankind,
that Muhammad (SA) is the Master of the First and the Last.
The second time "I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah" is
proclaimed, it means: I bear witness no one is in need of anyone but Allah, the One, the
Dominant. Everything is in need of Him. Glory be to Him! He is Self-Sufficient from His
Servants and all of creation. And I bear witness that He sent Muhammad (SA) to all
people as a Bearer of Glad Tidings, as a Warner who invites to Allah by His Permission,
and as a Light-Giving Torch. Therefore, whoever denies him, rejects him, and does not
believe in him. Allah, the Mighty and High, will cast him in the Hell-fire forever and ever,
and he shall never leave it.
As for the statement: "Hasten to the prayer" [hayya ala al-salah], i.e. come to the best
of your deeds, and the invitation of your Lord it means: Hasten to the forgiveness of
your Lord, who will free you from the burden of the Fire which you bear on your backs.
Hasten to free yourselves from enslavement to sin, so that Allah may pardon you your
wrongdoings, forgive you your sins, and replace your bad deeds with good deeds,
since He is the Sovereign, the Generous, the Possessor of Excellence, and the Most
Great. He has granted us, the Muslims, permission to enter into His service, and
granted us precedence in entering into His Presence.
The second time "hasten to the prayer" is said, i.e. rise up to communicate your needs
to your Lord, it means: Seek access to Him through His Words, intercede with Him, and
increase the mention of His Name, supplication, bowing down, prostration, submission,
and humbleness. Elevate your needs before Him, for He has permitted us to do so.
As for his statement `Hasten to the success" [hayya al al-falah] it means: Come to
eternity where there is no death, come to salvation from disaster; come to life without
death, to comfort without exhaustion, to sovereignty that does not decline, to joy
without grief, to sociability without loneliness, to light without darkness, to affluence
without tightness, to joy without end, to gratification without desire, to health without
illness, to dignity without humility, to strength without weakness, and to the greatest of
honor. Hasten to the joy of this world and the Hereafter by attaining salvation in this
world for the Hereafter.
The second time that "hasten to the success" is said it means: Compete in what I have
called you to; vie for ample generosity, great kindness, splendid bounty, great success,
and everlasting comfort in the proximity of Muhammad (SA) in a seat of truth before a
Powerful King.
As for his statement: "Allah is the Greatest" [Allahu Akbar] it means: Allah's Kindness
towards His Creation is grater than anyone can possibly conceive. It refers to His
Kindness towards His Servants through answering their prayers; His Kindness towards
His Servants who obey Him, and who obey His Legal guardians; His Kindness towards
His Servant who serves Him, who preoccupies himself with Him and His Remembrance,
who loves Him, and who befriends Him; His Kindness towards Hi servant who find
tranquility in Him, who trust Him, who fears Him, who puts his hope in Him, who yearns
for Him, who accepts His Commands and decrees, and who is please with Him.
The second time that "Allah is the Greatest" is said it means: Allah's Kindness towards
His Creation is so great that it cannot possibly be conceived. It refers to His Kindness
253

towards His Friends, His Punishment of His Enemies, the extent of His Pardoning, His
Forgiveness, and His Bounty towards those who answer His Call, and the Call of His
Messenger. It also refers to the extent of His Punishment and His Humiliation of those
who deny Him and who reject Him.
As for the statement: "There is no got but Allah" [la ilaha illa Allah] it means: Allah is
the conclusive argument over humankind via His Messengers, His Message, His
Clarification, and His Invitation. He is far above any argument against Him. Therefore,
whosoever answers His Call, then for him is both light and kindness. And whosoever
denies Him, then verily, Allah is Self-Sufficient from the Worlds, and He is the Swiftest
in Taking Account.
The meaning of "the prayer has begun" [qad qamat al-salah] in the Call to Prayer
[iqamah] is: Now is the time for visiting, supplication, fulfilling needs, achieving wishes,
and seeking Allah, the Mighty and High, as well as His Kindness, His Forgiveness, His
Pardon, and His Pleasure."
The Compiler of this book says: Verily, the narrator of this tradition avoided mentioning
"Hasten to the best of deeds" [hayya ala khayr al-Amal] due to dissimulation [taqiyyah].
2. It has been narrated in another tradition that

E G7 G G G H I G G H H
. G
Al-Sadiq (AS) was asked about the meaning of hasten to the best of deeds;'
Hence he replied: "The best of the deeds is the Guardianship [al-wilayah]."
In another tradition the best of deeds is said to be kindness towards Fatimah and her
children (AS).

254

Chapter Thirty-Five: Tafsir al-Hud wa-al-Dalalah wa-al-Tawfiq wa-alKhidhlan min Allah Taala The Commentary of Guidance,
Misguidance, Direction, and Forsaking is from Allah, the Exalted - 4
traditions

! I
1. Ali ibn Abd Allah al-Warraq; Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Sinani; and Ali ibn Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on them) all said: Abu al-Abbas
Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakariyya al-Qittan said: Bakr ibn Abd Allah ibn Hubayb said: Tamim
ibn Bahlul said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Jafar ibn Sulayman al-Basri,
on the authority of Abd Allah ibn al-Fadl al-Hashimi that

% G 3 G m G I I GI H H G G E H }

G G o
C m ! 2 3 H G " Z G b G

C m H G!" GG H G

G IG 3 G G 3 G R)G I C G IGI >

G " H H % 3 H %
H H G G G Z G % G
G H G G%G H H 2 G " G G G *

% ! 2 3 G Ga G E 4 G7 2 G " Z H G%G 2 a

G G G 3 % H o

G ! G GG G I % 3

. % _ *
% I 2 G 3 I %

I asked Abu Abd Allah Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty
and High: Whomsoever Allah guides, he is the rightly guided one and whomsoever He
causes to err, you shall not find for him any friend to lead (him) aright.
Therefore, he (AS) explained:
Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, leads astray the oppressors on the Day of
Judgment from the abode of His Kindness, and guides the Faithful ones and the ones
with good deeds, to Paradis, as He, the Mighty and High, says: And Allah causes the
unjust to go astray, and Allah does what He pleases. The Mighty and High says: Surely
(as for) those who believe and do good, their Lord will guide them by their faith; there
shall flow from beneath them rivers in gardens of bliss.
255

He says: I asked, "What about the Word of Mighty and High: And with none but Allah is
the direction of my affair to a right issue, and His Word, the Mighty and High: If Allah
assist you, then there is none that can overcome you, and if He forsakes you, who is
there then that can assist you after Him?
Thus, he (AS) replied:
If a servant carried out what Allah, the Mighty and High, commands him to do in terms
of obedience, then his action would be in accordance with the Command of Allah, the
Mighty and High, and the servants will be directed.
However, if a servant intends to disobey Allah, then Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
obstructs him from that disobedience, refraining him from it. If the servant was
refrained from disobedience it was due to Allah's guidance, Exalted be His
Remembrance. Whenever He leaves him to disobedience, and does not present him
from disobedience, then Allah has forsaken him, and decided not to guide him and
assist him.
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with him) said: alHusayn ibn al-Hasan ibn Aban said, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Abu Abd Allah al-Fana', on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Muslim and Muhammad ibn Marwan that

.GG H G H G " H H G G 2 G G G O H G G : G G2 G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The Messenger of Allah (SA) only knew that Jibra'il
was from Allah, the Mighty and High, through (divine) direction [tawfiq]."
3. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said: al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Sukkari said: Abu Abd Allah
Muhammad ibn Zakariyya al-Basari said: Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Umarah said, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Jabir ibn Yazid al-Jufi that

H G G G H G " G G G GG H G " H % d
.H H G GG G H G " G G
I asked Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (AS) about the meaning of "there is no
power and no strength save in Allah" [la hawla waw la quwwata illa bi Allah].
Therefore, he (AS) answeret means that we have no power to disobey Allah except
by the help of Allah, and we have no strength to obey Allah except by the direction of
Allah, the Mighty and High."
4. Abd al-Wahid ibn Muhammad ibn Abdus al-Attar (may Allah be pleased with him) said in
Naysabur year 352 AH that Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Qutaybah said, on the authority of
Hamdan ibn Sulayman al-Naysaburi that

256

m % G I G G H H G G G _

m G #
C G (R)G % G I G G G G G
G o

G % GH m G H G%G G G!" G

G o

.

I asked Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) in Naysabur about the Word of Allah,
the Mighty and High: Therefore, (for) whomsoever Allah intends that He would guide
him aright, He expands his breast for Islam. He clarified, Whoever Allah intends to
guide with faith in Him in this world, and to His Paradise and abode of Kindness in the
Hereafter, He expands his breast in submission to Allah, trust in Him, and satisfaction
with His Promises and Rewards until He is tranquil And whosoever He intends that He
should cause him to err from His Paradise and abode of His Kindness in the Hereafter
for his disbelief and disobedience of Allah in this world, He makes his breast strait and
narrow so that he doubts due to his disbelief, and his heart is confused concerning his
faith until he becomes as though he were ascending upwards; thus, does Allah lay
uncleanness on those who do not believe.

257

Chapter Thirty-Six: Al-Radd ala al-Thanawiyyah wa-al-Zanadiqah.
The Refutation of the Dualists & the Atheists - 6 traditions

1. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on them_ said:
Abu al-Qasim al-Alawi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan
said: Ibrahim ibn Hashim al-Qummi related to me that al-Abbas ibn Amr al-Fuqaymi said: on
the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that

G G I H G" % G G 2 G G G

E G C G G HG G (R) Z G #

G G Y G % H L 2 G

G H L G " G G H G }
H E I G _ G G G E I G _ G G G H G

H GI H G H G Z G Z G
G G H G H G H G G
G H I E G H G L H G G " H G _ H G G O

H G G G7 G Z L H G G (R) I Z G I Z G }
>

G G G7 I G G!I H Z

I Z G Y H L H GH G G G G 2 G%

E G G!" > G " H 3
G G ~2 3 L G " Z G % H L G E G2 E H
H G G G 4 % H Z >
G 2 G" G!" 4 G! G G G

H _ m
C % 3 % G 3 G _ G C C

G%G G m E $G G G E G G G G G G G G
G O

4 H 4 % H G%G G *
G 2 G%G G m % H G" G! G%G G *
G 2
> _G % % G H H G%_ G m GZ O L G" Z I G" Z L G" OG Y
258

H % H G!" H G " G G7 GeG OG Y G2 H Z I G"
G G G G2 G G 2 G

G G >

G O

G% L I G Y G G 4 Z G!" G _G

G G >
G%GO G G 2 G G H H G%G H m G H

G O

G G2 Z H G " Z G HG(R)
G 3 _ GE C Y H G E G Y

G " G G I G G E G G G G >

G" % G H G H I G G xH

G G G G G G G H >

E E G!"E H E G!"E E G G!"E G G G IGC 3 G IG G G I
H G IG 32 G G G G!" E
G G 2 LH 2 G" % 3
G O
H G G xH >
G 2 G G" % C G H
L 2 Y H G O H _G" %
G O

G H G G G G _ I G H G H G H G %
G O

G G G % IH 2 % % H G n

Y H G G%G H G G H GI G G G k
E >
G 2 G" G H G H G C C

G H G G G G G %
G m
H I m I G IG G m IC G m

G O
% G1/4 G H G G G H G E E (c)
2 G G ~ m G C G G 2

G O
G H G G G G ! G G (c)

H _ H G G G7 G Y G G2

259

G H G ! 2 3 G
G G G G G E G!" E G %

Z G % H G E 4 G!" G%G

G O

G O
% H G E 4 G!" E G!" Z H H

H G!" G IG G G 2G G H H % H G
H G _ G % % H G

2 $

G G% G H H G G!" G G G H G

Z G Z G Y Z G H H HG" G G2 Z G LH 2 G
G O

G I G % G m Z G G H G G G H

G IG G I C G G2G }

G 2

G L 2 G%G3 G IGG
GG I G G 2 G G G G % 3 G

G G G G G GG G G G G

G G H G G7 I G IG G

G G% G G" G G " G G G

G G H G G G C G
A dualist came to Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS). Among the things Abu Abd Allah (AS)
said to him was: If you claim that "there is two (gods)" there can only be three
possibilities. One: that both gods are eternal and all-powerful. Two: that both gods are
weak. Or three: that on of them is all-powerful, and the other one is weak. Now, if both
of them are powerful, then why doesn't one of them overthrow the other, and mange all
affairs single-handedly? If you believe that one of them is powerful, and the other one
260

weak, then you have proved that He is One, and to the apparent inability of the second.
And if you say that "they are two," then only two things are possible: one, that they are
both united in all aspects; or two, that they are separate in all aspects.
However, when we contemplate the organization in creation, the orbits of the planets in
the celestial sphere, the variation of day and night, the sun and the moon, and how
everything operate in harmony, everything points that he Manager is One.
Furthermore, if you claim that there are two gods, there must be a division between
them both which has always existed, and that division would have to be a third god.
However, if your claim that there are three gods, then there must be two divisions
between them, leaving us with fie gods, and so on add aeterum.
Hisham said: The dualist then questioned him until he asked, "What is the proof of His
Existence?"
Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied, "The existence of great wonders is proof that they were
created by the Creator. When you see the imposing structure of building, you know
instinctively that it was built by someone, even though you did not see him build it.
He enquired, "What is He?"
The Imam (AS) explained,
He is a thing unlike other things. Consider the word "a thing" in order to understand its
implication. Since He is Real, and He Exists, He is indeed a Thing. However, He is
devoid of both body and image. He is neither sensed nor felt, nor is He perceived by the
five senses. The imagination perceives Him not. He is not subject to time. Time has no
effect upon Him.
The questioner asked, "Therefore, you are saying that Verily, He is All-Hearing, and AllSeeing?"
The Imam (AS) responded,
He is All-Hearing, and All-Seeing. He is All-Hearing without tools, and All-Seeing,
without instruments. In fact, He hears by means of His entire being and He hears by His
entire being. My statement does not mean that "He hears by means of His Entire Being"
in the sense that He is something, and His Being is something else. I am simply using
this example in order to answer your question. I say: "He hears by means of His Entire
Being" and not in the sense that He has parts. Rather, I am attempting to make myself
understood. My only other option would be to say that He is All-Hearing, All-Seeing, AllKnowing, and All-Informed, in His Very Essence.
The questioner questioned, "Than what is He?"
Abu Abd Allah (AS) answered,
He is the Lord. He is the Worshipped One, He is Allah. When I use the word "Allah," I
am not referring to the combination of the letters "a," "l," and "h". Rather, I am pointing
to its meaning. He is a thing that is the Creator of all Things, and their Manufacturer
who is described by means of these letters. He is the one who is referred to by the
names Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful, the Honorable, among other
names. He is the Worshipped One, the High and mighty.
The questioner enquired, "So anything we can conceive of it created?"
Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied:
If things were as you claimed, then recognizing Divine Unity would be beyond our
reach. We are not obliged to believe in what cannot be imagined. However, we say:
everything we can conceive with our senses is perceived. Therefore, whatever the
sense can discover and demonstrate is created.
In order to prove the existence of the Creator of All Things, we must do so without
recurring to two erroneous approaches: the first of which is negation, i.e. abolition
[ibtal], and non-existence [adam]; and the second is anthropomorphism, i.e.
description, composition [tarkib], and formation [ta'lif]. We cannot prove the existence
of the Creator on the basis of these two approaches as they are created, The Creator is
261

not like the created. If He resembles the created, then whatever applies to the created
would also apply to Him: such as coming into existence after non-existence, growth,
change of color, change of strength, and so forth.
The questioner sain attempting to prove His Existence, you have limited Him."
Abu Abd Allah (AS) responded, "I have not limited Him. ON the contrary, I have
demonstrated His Existence through the only means possible: assertion and negation."
The questioner sais His Existence real and actual?"
The Imam (AS) replied, "Yes, His Existence is Real as nothing can be prove without
being real and actual."
The questioner asked, "Does He have a shape?"
The Imam (AS) explained,
No, because shape is description that delineates. We must move away from negation
and anthropomorphism Whoever negates Him, denies Him, eliminates His Lordship,
and abolished Him. Whoever compares Him with other things describes Him on the
basis of created attributes which are not worthy of Him. Nevertheless, we must prove
His Essence without referring to shape. None is worthy of His Essence besides Him.
And no one shares His Essence, encompasses it, or knows it but Him.
The questioner said: "Does He sustain all things by Himself?"
Abu Abd Allah (AS) answered, "He is far Greater than sustaining things directly as only
crated being s bring things forth directly. Exalted is He! His Intent and His Will are
effective. He is the Mighty Doer of whatever He wills."
The questioner enquired, "Does He feel pleasure or anger?"
Abu Abd Allah (AS) said:
Yes. However, His Pleasure and His Anger differ from the pleasure and anger fund
among crated beings. Among created beings, pleasure and anger cause a change of
state which is an attribute of the created, the incapable, and the needy. He is the
Blessed and Exalted, the Honorable, and the Most Merciful. He is not in need of His
Creation, while all His Creation is in need of Him. Verily, He created all things by means
of invention and innovation, without any need or cause.
The questioner uttered, "Then what about His Word: The Most Compassionate is firm
on the Empyrean."
Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied,
He described Himself as such in order to convey that He is the Possessor of the
Empyrean, not in the sense that the Empyrean carries the Empyrean and restrains it.
And we say this because His has said: His Throne extends over the heavens and the
earth. Therefore, we say of the Empyrean and the Throne what He has said: and we
refute the notion that the Empyrean or the Throne contains Him as He is not in need of
space or anything which He has created. On the contrary, He has created them and they
are in need of Him.
The questioner said: "Then what is the difference between raising your hands to
heaven and lowering them towards the earth?"
Abu Abd Allah (AS) answered,
That makes no difference in His Knowledge, Encompassment, and Omnipotence, but
He, the Mighty and High, commanded His Beloved Ones and His Servants to raise their
hands to heaven towards the Empyrean because He made it a so0urce of sustenance.
This is proved from the Qur'an. It is also proved from the tradition of the Messenger
(SA) which says: "Raise your hands to Allah the Mighty and High." And this is agreed
upon between all the schools of thought in the Ummah.
The questioner asked, "How can you prove that Allah sent Prophets and messengers?"
Abu Abd Allah (AS) explained,
Verily, we have proved that we have a Creator and a Producer who is Exalted from His
Creation, and that he Producer is the Most Wise. It is impossible for His Creation to see
262

Him or touch Him. He does not contact His Creation directly nor does His Creation
contact Him directly. He does not reason with them, and they do not reason with Him.
Thus, this proves that He has Representatives and Servants in His Creations who guide
humanity towards what is best for them. They shall be granted e3ternitiy if they accept
guidance. And they shall face destruction if they reject guidance. Evidently, those who
promote the good and forbid the evil in His Creation must have been sent by the Most
Wise, the All-Knowing.
This demonstrates that He has Interpreters, and they are the Prophets, the Cream of His
Creation, who are men of wisdom whom He has sent to guide and educate humankind.
They are human in shape, but not in nature. They are endorsed by Allah, the Most Wise,
the Omniscient, with wisdom, signs, proofs, and evidence, like giving life to the dead,
healing lepers, and restoring sight to the blind. Verily, Allah's earth is never without a
Proof [hujjat] (of Allah) who brings the teachings of the Messenger (AS) and who
embodies justice.
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that

H H G C 3 G G H _ G H
. 3 H G " I G $ GIG
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "What is the Proof that Allah is One?"
He (AS) replied, "The Proof that Allah is One can be seen in the continued management
of creation and its perfection in all aspects. As the Mighty and High says: If there had
been in them any gods except Allah, they would both have certainly been in a state of
disorder."
3. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said, on the authority of his paternal uncle Muhammad
ibn Abu al-Qasim that Abu Saminah Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sayrafi related to me, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abd Allah al-Khursasani the servant of al-Rida (AS) that

H I C G % G _ G G H G

G~ G d G Y G G " G

H L 2 G H H G "

m E H G E H G dG E H G G m

% H G > n
G%G G " C > H G _ G E H G
263

H G G C % H H m G%G G " C > G "

G G!" > H G ~" G G%

I G H L G G _ % G G G G C

H G Y G " G%G3 G G G G G%G > d Z G G

G *

G >
G 2

Z G Z _ I G H L G >
G >
G G% x H d G IG G G G G

G G H G " G q G

G 2 H % G 3 G GI H G H G $ G7
G *
G! H % G 2 m G%G G *
% G G C H G G G I G G

H G " E G!"E E H H G G % H

E _ E G E G E I

G H G G H G " G 2 G G H G " G

H L G H G 3_ _ H G
G H H G " G G HG H G " G G

Z % % G 2 m G C G Z G2 E G H Z G G7 q H Z G Z G
d I 2 G I G G G!" H G%G3 q

G% x G % H G" G G
G G H G " G G G d I G
I 3 2 {
G _ G7 I G G!"G H H G H G!"

G k
H G H H % H G E* 2 G G % H G" E dG G % H G" G G

G 2 G % H G" G G
264

An atheist entered the presence of al-Rida (AS) when he had some people in his
presence.
Therefore, Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) asked him, "O man! Can you not see that if your
view is correct, and it is absolutely not, then we are equal despite our prayers, fasting,
alms-giving, and tht beliefs we profess have not harmed us?"
The atheist remained silent.
Then Abu al-Hasan (AS) added, "However, if our view is the correct one, which is
certainly the case, then you are lost, and we are saved."
The man said: "May Allah's mercy be upon you! Can you describe to me how He is and
where He is?"
The Imam (AS) answered,
Woe to you! Verily, you are misguided. He originated the "where" since He existed
when there was no "where." He originated the "how" since He existed when there was
no "how." He cannot be described in terms of "how" or "where," nor can he be
perceived by any of our senses, or gauged by any other means.
The man said: "Then surely He is nothing if He cannot be perceived by any of the
sense."
Abu al-Hasan (as) said: Woe to you! Will you deny His Lordship simply because your
sense cannot perceive Him? Although our senses fail to perceive Him, we know for
certain that He is our Lord despite arguments to the contrary."
The man said: "Then tell, since when has He existed?"
Abu al-Hasan saif you can tell me when He did no exist, I can tell you when He did
exist."
The man said: "Then how can we prove His Existence?"
Abu al-Hasan (AS) replied,
Verily, when I contemplate my body and see that it is impossible for me to increase or
decrease its breadth and height, to keep unpleasant things away from it, or draw
benefits to it, then I know that this structure has a Maker. I acknowledge His Existence
on the basis of the planets which orbit in the celestial sphere by His Command. I
acknowledge His Existence on the basis of the production of clouds in the sky. I
acknowledge His Existence on the basis of the movement of the winds. I acknowledge
His Existence on the basis of the movement of the sun, the moon, and the starts. When
I consider all the wonders of creation, I know that they are the product of a Determiner
[Muqaddir], and an Originator [Munshi'].
The man enquired, "Then why has He veiled Himself (from men)?"
Abu al-Hasan (AS) responded, "Verily, the veil between Allah and His Creatures is the
result of their sins. As for Him, no secret is hidden from Him whether day or night."
The man said: "Then why does the sense of sight not perceive Him?"
The Imam (AS) answered, "Vision seized Him not because He differs from His Creatures
who see and are seeing. He is far above being seeing by sight, encompassed by the
imagination, or conceived through reasoning."
The man said: "Then define His Limits for me."
The Imam (AS) answered, "He has no limits."
The man asked, "Why?"
The Imam (AS) answered,
He has no limits, because every limited thing has an end to its limits. If something can
be limited, it can also be extended. If something can be extended, it can also be
contracted. However, He is Unlimited. He is neither extended nor is He constrained. He
cannot be divided, nor can He be imagined.

265

The man said: "Then tell me about your saying that: "He is Subtle, All-Hearing, AllSeeing, All-Knowing and All-Wise.' Can He be All-Hearing without ears, All Seeing
without eyes, Subtle without hands, and Most Wise without workmanship?"
Abu al-Hasan (AS) replied,
Verily, a person among us is judge to be subtle on the basis of his workmanship. Have
you not seen a man who undertakes a task, and is subtle in his handling of it, so it is
saiow subtle is so and so!" Then how could it not be said that the Majestic Creator
is not Subtle when He creates a subtle and majestic creation, places souls in the living,
and creates diversity among species, so that none of them is identical to the other?
Every creature He has made contains subtle differences as a sign for the Subtle, AllAware, Creator.
When we look upon the trees, and the delicate fruits they bear, both edible and inedible,
we say that "Verily, our Creator is Subtle, but not like the subtlety of His Creatures in
their workmanship."
And we say, "Verily, He is All-Hearing," since the sounds of His Creatures, between the
Throne and the earth, are not hidden to him, whether they emanate from a mole or
something larger that that, and whether they originate on the land or in the depth of the
ocean. Even their various forms of communication are clear to Him. We say that "Verily,
He is All-Hearing, but not through ears."
Then we say, "Verily, He is All-Seeing," but not through eyes, for He can see even a
black speck on a black stone in the darkest night. He can see the tracks of an ant when
the night is pitch-black. He sees what is harmful to the ant, beneficial to the ant, and its
entire cycle of reproduction. And we say, "Verily, He is All-Seeing," but not similar to
the sight of His Creatures."
The narrator added, "The man did not leave until he had embraced Islam. The Imam
(AS) said other things as well."
4. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Abu al-Qasim Hamzah ibn
al-Qasim al-Alawi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail said: Abu Sulayman Dawud ibn Abd Allah
said: Amr ibn Muhammad related to me that Isa ibn Yunus related to me that

G2G q L 3 % G G G H G {
G 2 G G G 3 G G G

_ *
% G G Z G G Z m

G G H G " G % G L

C Z G" Z C 3 H G G% Z 2

G%GO G E % d G G G 2 G G%G G G2 G I %
G G G H G " G G2
H 3 G G7 G! d m
G H >

3

G GE % H G H G H G7 n

% 2 %H H G " G G2 % G % C

266

2 L G m H G I G G % H G
% _ G Z 2 G G%GO G H % G%G3 G I H G%G 3 G " G7 I G G % G%G

G!" _ 1/2
G G G % H G G G C E x dG
G G 2

G G 2 EqG O L d G G 2 > o

m I
I ^ m G G G 2 G G I G" G G%G Z 2G O

G " E _ G7 I G G

G H G G H G G 7 G

% G H E G!" % G E G!"
G m

% % H H dG % H G%G G G G2 G G *
G G H G G G G G >
G G G G H G G G7 {
G G7 G~ G%G G G G % % H
G7 L E G~ d Z G! G 3 d {
G G7 G~ % G G G G

. 3
% H G" Z G H G " G%G G

Ibn Abu al-Auja' used to be one of the students of al-Hasan al-Basri until al-Basri went
astray on the subject of Divine Unity. Hence, it was said to him, "You left the path of
your teacher and embraced a belief which has no foundation in reality."
Therefore, he responded, "Verily, my teacher was confused, Sometime he supported
the concept of Free-will [qadr], and sometimes he supported the concept of
Compulsion [jabr]. I do not know whether he finally embraced one of them."
Ibn Abu al-Awja' came to Mecca full of arrogance and in opposition of those who were
performing the pilgrimage. He used to abhor the learned ones. However, he would sit in
their gatherings, asking them evil questions conceived in his corrupt mind. On one
occasion, he came to Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) to question him. Consequently, he
sat down before him was a group of people who had views similar to his and asked, "O
Abu Abd Allah! Verily, meetings should be confidential. If someone has to cough, he
should cough. Do you permit me to talk?"
So the Imam (AS) responded, "Ask whatever you wish."
Then he asked,
267

How much longer will y our people continue to trample underfoot this threshing floor,
honor this Stone, serve this House elevated with bricks and clay, and run about it like a
camel when it stampedes? Verily, whoever ponders about this will come to know that
this ritual was founded by one who was both unwise and without vision. Since your
father (the Prophet) established this ritual, and you are the one responsible for this
affair, will you not explain it to us?
Then Abu Abd Allah (AS) answered,
Verily, whoever Allah misguides and whose heart is blind cannot digest the truth;
hence, he does not find it pleasant. Satan becomes his guardian and brings him to the
pools of disaster, from which Allah will not save him.
Allah sought His service from His creation through this House to test the obedience of
His Creation. Hence, He urged them to revere it and He urged them to visit it. He made it
the place of His Messengers and the direction [qiblah] of prayer. Thus, it is a means of
attaining His Pleasure and a means of attaining His Forgiveness. It has been raised to a
level of perfection, and is a meeting place filled with grandeur and glory. Allah created it
two thousand years before spreading the earth. He is more deserving for people to
obey His Commands and abstain from His Prohibitions. Allah is the Producer of Spirits
and Images.
Ibn Abu al-Awja' said: "O Abu Abd Allah! You invoked the absent."
Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied, "Woe be to you! How could He be absent when He is the
Witness to His Creation, and is closer to them than their jugular vein? He hears their
speech sees their figures, and knows their innermost secrets."
Ibn Abu al-Awja' asked, "Then is He is every space? If He is in heaven, then how can
He be on earth? And if He is on the earth, then how can He be in heaven?"
Consequently, Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied,
Verily, what you have described only applies to the created. Only the created vacate a
space when they change place. As far as the created are concerned, they have no idea
of their previous space when they take up a new space. As for Allah, the Most Great in
Rank, and the Most Bountiful Sovereign, there is no space free of Him, and no place
which contains Him. There is no space closer to Him than another space. He sent
Muhammad with His Firm Signs and Clear Proofs, and provided him with His Help. He
chose him to deliver His Message. We confirm this word that his Lord sent him and
what He spoke to Him (through revelation).
Hence, Ibn Abu al-Awja' left his presence and said to his friends: "Who poured this
Ocean (of Knowledge) on me?
And in the tradition of Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) it states:
"Who placed me in this ocean? I asked you to find me some wine, and you dropped me
on the ember?" They replied, "You behaved inappropriately in his presence." He said:
"He is indeed the son of the one who made these people shave their heads."
5. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said: Ahmad ibn Yahya said, on the authority of Bakr ibn Abd
Allah ibn Hubayb that Ahmad ibn Yaqub ibn Matar related to me that Muhammad ibn alHasan bin Abd al-Aziz al-Ahdab al-Jund said in Naysabur that I found in my father's book in
his writing: Talhah ibn Yazid said, on the authority of Ubayd Allah ibn Ubayd, on the authority
of Abu Mamar al-Sadani that

G G G7 L ~G EqG G H G GG G Z H

268

3 H G Z % _ Z % _ G
G H G " EqG G C G G%G C

m

% H G Z H b G Y C

G GG G G H~d O % H G Z H O
m

H b G O C m

G H G " Z E 2 G }

_ 3 G IG G G G G G" L H H G 3 GH G
3

Z H G G H _ G G IG m

% G 3 m a

H 3 E G m G G G .# Z $ m G2

G I G IG m .Z % G O H % G

Z m >
GG G G H~d [Z G] G G%G

G G Z H G " % _ E 2 G
m ! 2 3 G G%G L

I C Z G3 H m R)G G I Z G G

G G H~d _ G G" G _ H I C G 3 G G C G H I C

m H

Z H Z Z G G O % H dG G Z H Z Z G Z G Z G Y G H m b G %

GG G G H~d b G % m
269

m G
>
G G7E H G G G _ m m ! 2 3

E G G I_ I H G" ^H m G I_ G G G I G"

H G m

GG G G H~d G G G 2 G

C m H

G E G7 I G 3d H G "
E H H G b b

G $ G d C G d G O I G 3d3 H G "

C G d m Z H Z L 2
2 G L $ 3 I G" Z Y _ >

>

G G I_ G GG m % H

G G% G " I H G I_ I H

%H Z H % I H G Z H Z G Z G%_ G
>

% G 3

GG G G H~d Z G G%G

G m ! 2 3 G G%G L >

C 3 G2 C H
m H I G G I_ E G G I H C

C I H G Z H C GG

G Y m !

Gd Z G G I GY Z Y 3
270

G Gd % G L C E G G

G G 3G G I Y 3/4

H m ! G G%G L >
_ !G" H G _ G H >
H 3

}_ m % H 3 IG 3 G Y H7
3

GG G G H~d G IG Y aG G GO H 3
2 3 HC
G (R) G G O G G G! G 3 G " L G

C G 3 G " > 3/4

G Z !

H % H I Y Z G2 Z ! 2 3
G%G C Y G H G O

G H G 2 GH 4 G%G G

G " G " G G G G H G (R) %

Y % H L L Z (c)
G " H G%G G G Z G G (R) GG H G " H

G G7 I G G%G G m

G m G IG G Y H H G%G G G G G _G

G I 2 G % H G _ G
O G H G Z G2 Z ! 2 3 H H G (R) b G Y C

m

H b G O C m % H H

G G % G G H _ G % Z
G % G G G G" L H H G 3 % GH G

271

G GG G E G G G G7 G H G (R)
2G G I I G IG _ 3 G IG

H G G7 E G G O H H E

G 2 3 G NC G
G H G E 2 G I }

C G G7 G G C 2 I G >

G I m G G G G7 }

G > }

G G > > G 3 H G%G

G H G H 3 G m G }

2
H G " I L H G IG G m G G L

! 2 3 G G G H _ G

G IG G H I G L E G _G I G G m G IG

G H E 4 H G H 3 G I G G G G

C G m H H % G E G I }

G H Z GI G G G E GI G E H _ G G G"

% 2 G% G G ! 2 3 G G E H G%G #$

G I G G G C G H H G% H G "
2 G I_ G G O G H
_ G 2 E G E G _ G H % 2

>

G Z Z C 2 O % G

d Y G% G E Y G " C G

272

!G" U
G E G H H % H H Z _ L GG G

% G 3 % a

I G IG m .Z % G O

H G G G%G G E G G7 G H G (R) a

G E G % H d Z G G%G

m H

G I G G O G G G H H % G H

G I_ !G" % G I C G!"G H G H G G m G G

% G 3 % H ! 2 3 G%G G!" H

d Z G2 Z H ! 2 3 % Y C G%G
2 3 q G Z G Z d Z G Z G 3 % d L G" G~G _ H

3 H
C G7 G~ 3 > G " G G #

2 H G 2 G C H 3 G%G3$ % 2 d G~ 3 %

3 % H > %
.# Z $ % H % H I G G $ E G H G m GG H G" L 2 3

G G G 3 H G%G3 G7 G O G%_ >
G $ G .x *

G IG m .Z % G O H % G H G "

273

G ! 2 3 G" Z G H H GG G O G Z G G%G

H G " % G m G G % G q G G % I G

H 4
_ G2 G G 2 GH #

H ! 2 3 % G 4 G G

E G G Z H G " % _ E 2 G

L $ % I C % Z G3 H % m R)G G I Z

% _ E 2 G Gx2 % H G(R) G
E G G Z H G " % _ E 2 G

2 3 G m R)G G I Z G G
E G G H G " GE OG Z H G "

_ 2 G

Z G2 Z !

H G G G G G G G %

G O

G _G C G % E G d

% G E G E G G ^ H H G ^ I I Z G%G2 G7 m

^ I
m G 3 I % G C I G % G G % % G C G%G

G%G _ 2 % G H G (R) E G E G G G ^ H G (R) G G ^ G L G G G

HG(R) ! 2 3 G % Z % Gd3 H G (R) b G % % H
% G 2 m % Gd3 G ^ G 2 ^ % G 2 m
E G 3 H % H G(R) G G % I H G G $

3/4
G 2 G G Z ! 2 3 2 m G %I G 2 m G%G G 4 G 2 ^

G ^ % 2_ I G 2 ^ % G ! 2 3 G G G 2 ^ G%G ^ G 4 % G 2 m
274

H H G GI G 2 G G

G G7E H G G G _ m % H GG

G I G" % H G H m
4 % m

m H G" G " G E G I 2G m % H G G G

I H G" ^H % H I % G G I G!" ! G G H G E G % G G m

G I_ G I H G G G G G m H G(R)

H G7 G % H H Z _ L

G ! Z C Z 2C ! 2 3 G GG G 2 G

G%G G G H G 4 G%G G C G2

I _ G G _ E 4 _G 3/4

_ 4 _

C % H Z G2 Z G%G
% b b
!

G O G G E G7 I G 3d H G "

G $ G d C G d G O I G 3d3 H G "
H G H G (R) _ >

% G 2 m 3 G % Gd3 G
G G G E 4 H H G G % H

G G I !~G" G G" G G G " G x % G
G 2_ d G 2 ^
3 % Gd3 H 3 H H G G!" % Z IG Z 2G % I C 3 G%_ G!" %

Z H G G O I G 3d3 H G "

G O I G 3d3 H G "

G NH G 2G m
G $ G d C G d G%G G 2G m

C G G7 G IG 3d G G G m _ >
275

G $ G d H I H G H G%G G I !

H G G G G G1/4 G 2 G G m Z L 2

2 G L $ 3

G 2 G x H G" I G G G

G " % H m C 1/4 G
I % 3 G " G Z G I G m 2G G 3d #

G G I G G " GG G I % 3 G (R) G G G I d H H

G H G G G7 G % H Z G2 Z ! % 2 3 G #

m

o

C G 2 G % ^ 3 G%G G G7 H H
4 G%G G H H % Y G%G
G % G m G ! 2 3 C

G % G !G" G G G % G I_ I H

G I_ G GG % H d Z G Z G%_ G

G G G H H H 2 G m

2

2 I H

E G H G (R) G G
G m >

2 G
2 _ G

% I H G 3 % G 2 G G G m R) G%GO G G G

2 G IG G % H G m

G G I H m G m G I H C H

I G G I_ E G % G q
d ~ L m ~G" m % G G E ~ L ~G" %
276

C 3 GG G % H G2 C H
m H

E Gm C I _ H G E G G
E Gm C E C G H C H E Gm H

H > 3/4

G%G G G I Z Y 3 G G G G G
G Y ! 2 3 %

G G G E G I ! 2 3
H G H G (R) Z G G I GY H H % H G G

L H H H G H G (R) G

E G G E G G G I H G " G! G

C G2G G G H G o

G G G C 3 I H G I G dG G G A

%G L % H G%G G I G H H

E G G ... H

H >

>

3
G >
G G m H G(R) %G L H

3 _ !G" H G _ G H >

% G IG Y aG G G O H 3
}_ m % H 3 % IG 3 G Y

_ m
m G2_ G O H 3
_ ! 2 3

G m G
G H G O G%G G m G Z

_G 3/4
_ ! 2 3
_ m G G qG G m G G C m

H G G O G G%G G m

2H G H L d L H 3 G (c)
L G " G NH G G G GG

G H G G % G I G%_ G G G % H G " G m

G GG G G%GO G G%G H H I

_ G G7 G G % % H
GHG H G d . G m 4 G G G
H G G G H G " ~G" % U

G% G G G 32 G" H G " G ~H G H 3 HG G %H G G % H G"

A man came to the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) and said: "O
Commander of the Faithful! Verily, I have doubted the Revealed Book of Allah."
The Imam (AS) replied to him, "May your mother be bereaved of you! How did you come
to doubt the Revealed Book of Allah?"
He said: "Because I find some parts of the Book belie some other parts then how
should I not doubt in it.?"
Consequently, Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) replied, "Verily, when it comes to the Book of
Allah, some parts of it verify other parts. However, you have not been given the
sustenance of wisdom to benefit form it. Bring me what you doubt in the Book of Allah,
the Mighty and High."
The man explained to him (AS), "I found Allah saying that So today We forget them, as
they forgot the meeting of this day of theirs, also: They have forgotten Allah, so He has
forgotten them, and said: And your Lord is not forgetful. Thus, once He informs that He
does forget and in another place He says that He does not forget. O Commander of the
Faithful, what is that?"
Imam Ali (AS) said: "Bring me what you doubt in."
He said:
I have found Allah saying that The Day on which the spirit and the angels shall stand in
ranks; they shall not speak except he whom the Most Compassionate God permits and
who speaks the right thing, He says: (they will speak) They would say: By Allah, our
Lord, we were not polytheist, He says: On the Resurrection Day some of you shall deny
others, and some of you shall curse others, then He says: That most surely is the truth:
the contending one with another of the inmates of the fire, He says: Do not quarrel in
My Presence, and indeed I gave you the threatening beforehand, and He says: We will
set a seal upon their mouths, and their hands shall speak to Us, and their feet shall bear
witness of what t hey earned. Therefore, on one occasion He says that they will speak,
and on another occasion He says: "they will not speak except he whom the Most
Compassionate permits and who speaks the right thing." In one place He informs that
the creation will not speak and describes their statement: "By Allah, our Lord, we were
278

not polytheist." In another place He says that they will quarrel. O Commander of the
Faithful, why is that? And how shall I not doubt in what you hear (from me)?
The Imam said: "Woe unto you! Bring me what you doubt in."
He responded,
I also find Allah, the Mighty and High saying that Faces on that day shall be bright,
looking to their Lord, and he says: Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends
(all) vision; and He is the Knower of Subtleties, the Aware, He says: And certainly he
saw him in another descent, a the farthest lotus-tree; He also says: On that day shall no
intercession avail except of him whom the Beneficent Allah allows and whose word He
is pleased with. He knows what is before them and what is behind them, while they do
not comprehend it in knowledge. Whoever the eyes have perceived is encompassed in
knowledge. O Commander of Faithful, why is that? And how shall I not doubt in what
you hear?
The Imam (AS) said: "Woe unto you! Bring me what you doubt in."
The man uttered,
I also find Allah, the Blessed, the Exalted, that And it is not for any man that Allah
should speak to him save by revelation or from behind a veil, or by sending a
messenger (angel) and to reveal by His permission what He wills, He also says: And to
Musa, Allah addressed His Word, speaking (to him), and He says: And their Lord called
out to them, and He says, O Prophet! Say to your wives and your daughters and He also
says: O Messenger! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord. Why is that
O Commander of the Faithful? And how shall I not doubt in what you hear?
The Imam said: "Woe unto you! Bring me what you doubt in."
The man further said:
I find Allah, High be His Praise, saying that Do you know anyone else named with the
same names? He names the human as hearing [sami], seeing [basir], sovereign
[malik], lord [rabb]. Therefore, at times He says that He has many common names, and
at other times He says: "do you know anyone else named with the same name?" Why is
that O Commander of the Faithful? And ho shall I not doubt in what you hear?"
The Imam said: "Woe unto you! Bring me what you doubt in."
He said:
I found Allah, the Blessed and Exalted saying, that And there does not lie concealed
from your Lord the weight of an atom in the earth or in heaven, and that nor will He
look upon them on the Day of Resurrection nor will He purify them, and also that Nay!
Most surely they shall on that day be veiled from their Lord. How does He look at them
when they are veiled? And why is that O Commander of the Faithful? And how shall I
not doubt in what you hear?
The Imam (AS) replied, "Woe unto you! Bring me what you doubt in."
He continued,
And I find Allah, the Might and High, saying that Are you secure of those in heaven and
He should not make the earth to swallow you up, and that The Most Compassionate
Allah is firm on the Empyrean, and also that And He is Allah in heavens and in the
earth; He knows your secrets and your disclosures, and that The Manifested and the
Hidden, and that He is with you wherever you may be, and also that We are nearer to
him than his jugular vein. Then why is that O Commander of the Faithful? And ho shall I
not doubt in what you hear?
The Imam (AS) said: "Woe unto you! Bring me more what you doubt in."
The man further said:
I find Allah, High be His praise, saying that And your Lord comes and (also) the angels
in ranks, and he said: Verily, you have come to Us alone as We created you at first, and
said: They do not wait aught but that Allah should come to them in the shadows of the
clouds along with the angels, and also said: They do not wait aught but that the angels
279

should come to them, or that your Lord should come, or that some of the signs of your
Lord should come. On the day when some of the Signs of your Lord shall come, its
faith shall not profit a soul which did no believe before, or earn good through its faith.
Thus, in one place He says: "On the Day your Lord should come" and in another place
He says: "on the Day some of the Signs of your Lord should come." Then why is that O
Commander of the Faithful? And how shall I not doubt in what you hear?
The Imam (AS) said: "Woe unto you! Bring me what you doubt in."
The man continued,
And I find Allah, the Mighty and High, saying that Nay! They are unbelievers in the
meeting of their Lord, and when He mentioned the Believer, He said: Who know that
they shall meet their Lord and that they shall return to Him, and said: Their greetings on
the Day when they meet Him shall be: "Peace," and He also said: Whoever hopes to
meet Allah, then meeting Him is forthcoming, and said: Therefore, whoever hope to
meet his Lord, he should do good deeds. Thus, in one occasion, He says that they will
meet Him, and on other occasion, He says that vision cannot perceive Him, and that He
perceives all vision. And at another time He says: "They cannot encompass Him with
knowledge." Then why is that O Commander of the Faithful? And how shall I not doubt
in what you hear
The Imam (AS) said: "Woe unto you! Bring me what you doubt in."
The man said:
I found Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, that And the guilty shall see the fire, then they
shall think that they are going to fall into it, and He said: On that day Allah will pay back
to them in full their just reward, and they shall know that Allah is the evident Truth, and
He also said: You began to think diverse thoughts of Allah. So in one place He says that
"they think," and in another place He says that "they know." Thinking [zann] is doubt.
Then why is that O Commander of the Faithful? And how shall I not doubt in what you
heard?
The Imam (AS) said: "Bring me what you doubt in."
The man said:
I find Allah, the Exalted, saying that And We will set up a just balance on the Day of
Resurrection, so no soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least; and He said:
Therefore, We will not set up a balance for them on the Day of Resurrection, and He
also said: These shall enter the garden, in which they shall be given sustenance
without measure, and He also said: And the measuring out on the that day will be just;
then as for him whose measure (of good deeds) is heavy, those are they who shall be
successful; and as for him whose measure (of good deeds) is light those are they who
have made their souls suffer loss because they were unjust towards Our signs. Then
why is that O Commander of the Faithful? And how shall I not doubt in what you hear?
The Imam (AS) replied, "Woe unto you! Bring me what you doubt in."
The man said:
I found Allah, the Exalted, saying that Say: The Angel of Death who is given charge of
you takes your souls, then to your Lord you shall be brought back, and He said: Allah
takes the souls at the time of their death, and He also said: Our Messengers (angels)
take his soul away, and they are not remiss, and also said: Thos whom the angels take
away their souls in a good state, and He also said: Those whom the angels take away
their souls while they are unjust to themselves. Then why is that O Commander of the
Faithful? And how shall I not doubt in what you hear? Thus, I shall perish if you do not
have mercy on me, and expand my chest for me in what might happen by my hands.
For if the Lord, the Blessed and Exalted is truth, the book is truth, and the Messengers
are truth, then I have perished and am in loss. However, if the Messengers are false
then it does not matter, and I am saved.
Consequently, Ali (AS) said:
280

Our Lord, the Most Holy, Blessed and Exalted be He, is Elevated, and Great. We bear
witness that He is the Ever-Lasting who does not decline. We do not doubt in Him, and
there is nothing whatsoever like Him, and He is All-Hearing, the All-Seeing. And we bear
witness that the Book is truth, the Messengers are truth, and that the reward of Allah
and the wrath of Allah are true. Thus, if you are given faith, or faith is taken away from
you, then that is Allah's prerogative. If He wishes to bless you, He will and if He does
not wish to, He will not.
Nonetheless, I will clarify the issues in which you doubt. There is no strength or power
but Allah. If Allah intends good for you, He will grant you guidance through His
Knowledge and keep you firm in faith. However, if He wishes evil for you, then certainly
you have gone astray and you have perished.
As for His Statement: "They forgot Allah so He has forgotten them," Verily, that means
"they forgot Allah in this world." Since they do not obey Him in this world, He has
forgotten them in the Hereafter. In other words, He will not reward them. As such, they
have been excluded from good.
Similar is the explanation of His Word, the Mighty and High "So today We forget them,
as they forgot the meeting of this day of theirs." What He means by "the forgetting" is
that He will not reward them like He rewards His Beloved Ones who were obedient to
Him in this world, and who remembered Him by professing faith in Him and in His
Messengers, and who feared Him in secret.
As for His word: "And you Lord id not forgetful" it means that our Lord, the Blessed
and Exalted, the Elevated, and the Great, is not forgetful or neglectful, rather, He is the
Protecting, the All-Knowing. The Arabs say about forgetfulness: "So and so has
forgotten us," i.e. he does not wish good for us not does he remember us with
goodness.
As a result, have you understood what Allah, the Mighty and High, has mentioned?
The man replied, "Verily, you have comforted me. May Allah comfort you! You have
resolved my problem. May Allah increase your reward!
The Imam (AS) continued,
As for His Word: "The Day on which the spirit and the angels shall stand in ranks; they
shall not speak except he whom the Most Compassionate God permits and who speaks
the right thing," and His Word: "By Allah, our Lord, we were not polytheists," and His
Word: "On the Resurrection Day some of you shall deny others, and some of you shall
curse others," and His Word: "That most surely is the truth: the contending one with
another of the inmates of the fire," and His Word: "Do not quarrel in My Presence, and
indeed I gave you the threatening beforehand." And he says: "We will set a seal upon
their mouths, and their hand shall speak to Us, and their feet shall bear witness of what
they earned."
Verily, these events take place at different times and at different places on the Day that
will last fifty thousand years. Allah, the Mighty and High, will bring forth all the
creations that Day in different places. Some will speak to others, and some of whom
will seek forgiveness for others. They are the obedient ones, and followers of the
(righteous) leaders in this world. The disobedient ones will curse. They are the ones
who incited hatred, and engaged in oppression and aggression on worldly abode.
The empowered ones and the weak ones will deny each other and curse each other.
The denial [kufr] in this verse refers to immunity. He is that "some of them shall grant
immunity to others." It is like the statement of Satan in chapter "Abraham: "Verily, I
disbelievers in your associating me with Allah before; and the statement of Ibrahim
(AS) the Friend of Allah: We renounce you, i.e. we disassociate ourselves for you. Then
they will unite in another place where they will cry.
If those screams arise for the people of this world, they would certainly startle all of the
creation from their livelihood, and their hearts would crack except what Allah wills.
281

Hence, they shall continue to weep bold. Then they will unite in another place where
they will be made to speak and say: "By Allah, our Lord, we were not polytheists."
Therefore, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, will set a seal upon their mouths, and their
hands, feet and skins will be made to speak. So they will witness every sin which they
did with these parts. Then the seal from their tongues will be raised so they will say to
their skins: Why have you borne witness against us? They shall say: Allah who makes
everything speak has made us speak.
Then they unite in another place and will be made to speak, but they will escape from
one another. This is the meaning of the Word of the Mighty and High: The day on which
a man shall fly from his brother, and his mother and his father, and his spouse and his
son. Thus, they will seek to speak but no one shall speak except for whom the
Beneficent permits and who speaks the right thing.
At this point the Messengers, blessings of Allah be upon them, shall rise and bear
witness, to the Word of Allah: How will it be, then, when We bring from every people a
witness and bring you as a witness against these? Then they will meet in another place,
where there shall be the place of Muhammad (SA) and that is the Praised Position [almuqam al-mahmud]. Thus, he (SA) will praise Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, the way
no one has praised Him before him.
Then he (SA) will praise each and every angel. There shall not remain any angel that he
will not have praised. Then he will praise the Messengers (AS) in such way that no one
has done so before him. The he (SA) will praise every believing man and believing
woman starting with the strictly veracious [siddiqin], the martyrs, and the pious ones
[salihin]. Then all the inhabitants of the heavens and the earth will praise him as we see
in the Word of Alla: Maybe your Lord will raise you to a praised position.
Hence, blessed are those who have any allotment in that Position, and woe unto those
who do not have any allotment or share in that Position. Then they will unite in another
place, and some of them will vie the upper hand to others. This is all before the
Accountability [al-hisab]. Thus, when one is taken to accountability then everyone shall
be occupied with what they have before them. We ask Allah for the blessing of that Day.
The man responded, "You have comforted me, O Commander of the Faithful. May Allah
comfort you! You have solved my problem. May Allah increase your reward!"
The Imam (AS) then continued,
As for the Word of the Mighty and High: "Faces on that day shall be bright, looking to
their Lord," and His Word: "Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends (ALL)
vision;" and His Word: "and verily he saw him in another descent, at the farthest lotustree;" and His Word also: "On that day shall not intercession avail except of him whom
the Most Compassionate Allah allows and whose word He is pleased with. He knows
what is before them and what is behind them, while they do not comprehend it in
knowledge."
As for His Word: "Faces on that day shall be bright, looking to their Lord" then Verily,
that is a place where the Beloved Ones of Allah, the Mighty and High, end up in after
they have finished with the accountability to the river which is named al-Hayawan. They
will wash in it and drink from it so their faces will be helped to shine. Hence, every
floating impurity and difficulty will vanish from them. Then they will be ordered to enter
Paradise. From this position they will look at their Lord, how He rewards them and from
there they will enter Paradise.
That is the Word of the Mighty and High about the salutation of the angels unto them:
Peace be on you, you shall be happy; therefore, enter it to abide. At that point, they will
be certain of entering Paradise and looking at what their Lord had promised them.
Thus, that is the Word of Allah: "looking to their Lord." Verily, what is meant by
"looking at Him" here is "looking at the reward of the Blessed and Exalted."
282

As for His Word: "Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends vision" then it is
just as He said: "vision comprehends Him not," i.e. the imaginations cannot
encompass him. "He comprehends vision" i.e. He encompasses vision "and He is the
Knower of subtleties, the Aware." That is the praise with which our Lord, the Blessed
and Exalted, has eulogized and extolled Himself, the Elevated, the High.
Musa (AS) asked and the praise of Allah, the Mighty and High, flowed over his tongue:
My Lord! Show me (Thyself), so that I may look upon Thee. Thus, his question was a
great matter and he had asked for a body matter and, hence, was inflicted. So Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, said: you will not see me in this world until you die, then you will
see Me in the Hereafter.
However, if you intend to see me in this world then look at the mountain, if it remains
firm in its place, then will you see Me; therefore, Allah, glory be Him, expressed some of
His signs and our Lord manifested to the mountain, the mountain had crumbled and
had become dust and Musa fell down in a swoon; i.e. he had died. Thus, his infliction
was the death, and then he was brought back to life by Allah and he recovered, he
returned and said: Glory be to Thee, I turn to Thee, and I am the first of the Believers,
i.e. the first who believed in You and who never say You.
As for His Word: And verily he saw him in another descent, at the farthest lotus-tree;
i.e. Muhammad (SA) was at the farthest lotus-tree, as no creation from the creation of
Allah crosses that position. And Allah's Word a the end of the verse: The eye did not
turn aside, nor did it exceed the limit, certainly he saw of the greatest signs of his Lord.
He (SA) saw Jibra'il (AS) in his true form twice, at this time, and at another time. Jibra'il
is enormous. He is one of the holy ones [rawhaniyin] whose creation and description
cannot be perceived except by Allah, the Lord of the Universe.
As for His Word: On that Day shall no intercession avail except of him whom the Most
Compassionate Allah allows and whose word He is pleased with. He knows what is
before them and what is behind them, while they do no comprehend it in knowledge.
The creations cannot comprehend Allah, the Mighty and High, in knowledge, as He is
the Blessed and Exalted. He has placed over the vision of the hearts a veil. Thus, no
understanding reaches Him in form. Nor any heat proves Him with limits. Therefore, no
one attributes Him except with what He has attributed Himself. There is nothing
whatsoever like unto Him and He is the All-Hearing, All-Seeing, the First, the Last, the
Manifest, the Hidden, the Creator, the Maker, the Imager. He created all things; none of
the things are like Him, the blessed and Exalted.
The man said: "You have comforted me. May Allah comfort you! You have solved a
problem. May Allah increase your reward, O Commander of the Faithful!
The Imam (AS) then added,
As for His Word: And it is not for any man that Allah should speak to him save by
revelation or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger (angel) and to reveal by His
Permission what He wills, and His Word: And to Musa, Allah addressed His Words,
speaking (to him), and also His Word: And their Lord called out to them, and His Word:
O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the garden! As for His Word: "And it is not for any
man that Allah should speak to him except by revelation or from behind a veil" for
verily it is a must for humankind that Allah may only speak to him through revelation
and that is not possible except from behind a veil, or by sending an angel to reveal by
His permission what He wills. That is what Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has said, the
Elevated and high.
The Messenger was revealed unto from the angels of heaven, thus, the angels of heave
delivered to the angels of the earth. The speech between the angels of the earth and the
Messenger did not happen without their speech with the angels of heaven. Hence, the
Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "O Jibra'il, have you seen your Lord?" He replied, Verily,
my Lord cannot be seen."
283

Consequently, the Messenger of Allah (SA) asked, "Then where do you take the
revelation from?" He answered, "I take it from Israfil." He (SA) enquired, "And where
does Israfil take it form?" He replied, "He takes it from another angel above him from
the divine ones." The Messenger (SA) asked, "And where does that angel take it from?"
He explained," It is thrown upon his heart."
This is revelation and that is the word of Allah, the Mighty and High, and the word of
Allah is not (revealed) in one method; among them is what Allah spoke to the
Messengers, among them is what He threw upon their hearts, among them is what the
Messengers see in their dreams, among them is inspiration and revelation which is
read and delivered. That is the word of Allah. Thus, I will suffice with what I have
described for you of Allah's speech. Verily, the meaning of Allah's Word is not one.
Among them is certainly what the angels of heaven deliver to the angels of the earth.
The man said: "You have comforted me. May Allah comfort you! You have solved a
problem. May Allah increase your reward, O Commander of the Faithful!"
The Imam (AS) then added,
As for His Word: Do you know anyone else named with the same name? Verily, the
interpretation of that is "do you know anyone else with the name Allah, other than
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted." Be careful not to explain the Qur'an by your personal
views unless you deeply understand it from the learned. For verily, there is revelation
many a times resembling the word of man, but it is the word of Allah. So its
interpretation does not resemble the word of man, like nothing from His Creation
resembles Him. Likewise, none of His Actions, the Blessed and Exalted, resemble the
actions of man and his Word does not resemble the word of man. Thus, the Word of
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted is His Attribute, and the words of man are their actions.
Therefore, do not compare the Word of Allah with the word of man for it you do then
you shall perish and go astray.
The man responded, "You have comforted me. May Allah comfort you! You have solve
a problem. May Allah increase your reward, O Commander of the Faithful!"
Then the Imam (AS) continued,
As for His Word: And there does not lie concealed from your Lord the weight of an
atom in the earth or in heaven, that is how our Lord is, nothing lies concealed from Him
and how could it, He who created the things would not know what He created, while He
is the Creator, the All-Knowing. And as for His Word: nor will he look upon them on the
Day of Resurrection, He is informing that He will not bestow upon them good. The
Arabs say: "By Allah, so and so does not look upon us." Verily, what they mean by it is
that "he does not bestow us good." Thus, that is the "look from Allah, the Exalted, to
His Creation here. So His Look upon them is His Mercy for them. And for His Word:
Nay! Most surely they shall on that day be veiled from their Lord. Verily, what He means
by this is "on the Day of Resurrection, they shall be veiled from the reward of their

The man responded, "You have comforted me. May Allah comfort you! You have solved
a problem. May Allah increase your reward!"
The Imam (AS) then said:
As for His Word: Are you secure of those in heaven that He should not make the earth
to swallow you up? And His Word: And He is Allah in heavens and in the Earth; and His
Word: The Most Compassionate Allah is firm on the Empyrean, and also His Word: He
is with you wherever you may be, and also His Word: We are nearer to him than his
jugular vein. Such is Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, the Most Praised, the Most Holy.
Exalted is He from what befalls the creations. He is the Subtle, the All-Informed, and far
beyond being compared to His Creation. His Knowledge is firm on the Empyrean. He is
the Witness to every whisper. He is the Custodian over Everything, the Creator of
284

Everything, and the Director of Everything. Far Exalted is Allah, Elevated and High,
from being on His Empyrean!
Thus, the Imam (AS) continued,
And as for His Word: And you Lord comes and (also) the angels in ranks, and His
Word: Verily, you have come to Us alone as We created you at first, and also His Word:
They do not wait aught but that Allah should come to them in the shadows of the
clouds along with the angels, and also His Word: They do not wait aught but that the
angels should come to them, or that your Lord should come, or that some of the signs
of your Lord should come. Verily, this is all truth as Allah, the Mighty and High has said.
He does not have a coming like the coming of the creation.
I have already taught you that there is something from the Book of Allah, interpretation
of which is other than its revelation and it does not resemble the word of man. I will
shortly notify you to one of its dimensions and that should suffice you, if Allah willing.
From that is the word of Ibrahim (AS): Surely I am going to my Lord; He will guide me.
Therefore, his going to His Lord is attention towards Him in service, effort and
closeness to Allah, High and Mighty. Do you not see that its interpretation is other than
its revelation?
He has also said: We sent down the iron, wherein is latent mighty power, i.e. the
weapons etc. They do not wait aught but that the angels should come to them, He is
informing Muhammad (SA) about the infidels and the hypocrites who did not respond
to Allah and the Messenger.
So He said: They do not wait aught but that the angels should come to them. As they
did not respond to Allah and His Messenger, "or that your Lord should come, or that
some of the signs of your Lord should come." What He means by this is that the
punishment should come to them in this world like He punished the earlier ages. Thus,
this is information about them He is giving to the Prophet (SA).
Then He says: On the day when some of the signs of your Lord shall come, its faith
shall not profit a soul which did not believe before, or earn good through its faith. That
is, before this sing comes, this sign is rising of the sun from the west; Verily, it would
suffice the ones with intellect, brain and understanding to know that if he removes the
veil they will see what they have been promised.
He has said in another verse: But Allah came to them whence they did not expect, i.e.
He sent unto them a punishment. And like is His Coming to their building as Allah, the
Mighty and High, has said: Then Allah came (and demolished) their building from the
foundations. Thus, His coming to their buildings from their foundations means sending
the punishment over them.
Similar is what He has described for the affair of the Hereafter, Blessed and Exalted be
His Name, Elevated High. Verily, He will set running His affairs in that Day, which is fifty
thousand years long, like He set running His affairs in this world. He does not
disappear, nor does He pass with the transitory.
Thus, I will suffice with what I have described for you from that which is wandering in
your mind of what Allah, the Mighty and High has described in His Book. Do not make
His Words like the word of humankind. He is Greater, Mightier, More Generous and
Higher, Blessed and Exalted from that which the attributers may attribute. Except with
what He attributes Himself in His Word, the Mighty and High: There is nothing
whatsoever like unto Him and He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.
The man said: "You have comforted me, O Commander of the Faithful! May Allah
comfort you! You have soled a problem. May Allah increase your reward!
The Imam (AS) then said:
As for His Word: Nay! They are unbelievers in the meeting of their Lord, and when He
mentioned the Believer: Who know that they shall meet their Lord, and His Word for
other than the Believers: Till the day when they shall meet Him because they failed to
285

perform towards Allah what they had promised with Him, and also His Word: Therefore,
whoever hopes to meet his Lord, he should do good deeds. As for His Word: Nay! They
are unbelievers in the meeting of their Lord, i.e. the raising from death [al-bath] so
Allah, the Mighty and High, has named it His Meeting.
Likewise, He has mentioned the Believers: Who know that they shall meet their Lord,
i.e. they are certain that they will be raised, gathered, accounted and paid with the
reward or punishment.
Therefore, the word zann (strong belief) in this context specifically is "certainty."
Like is His Word: Therefore, whoever hopes to meet his Lord, he should do good
deeds. And His Word: Whoever hopes to meet Allah, then meeting Him is forthcoming,
i.e. whoever believes that he will be raised from death, then verily Allah's promise about
the reward and punishment is forthcoming.
Hence, here "the meeting" is not "the viewing." In fact, it is the raising from death. So
understand this that verily all of "His Meeting" in the Book of Allah is meant to be "the
raising from death." And similar is His Word: their greetings on the Day when they meet
Him shall be: "Peace," i.e. that "the faith will not decline from their hearts the Day when
they are raised again."
The man said: "You have comforted me, O Commander of the Faithful! May Allah
comfort you! You have solved a problem. May Allah increase your reward!"
At that time the Imam (AS) said:
As for His Word: And the guilty shall see the fire, then they shall think that they are
going to fall into it, i.e. they will be certain that they are going to enter it. Similar is His
Word: Surely I knew that I shall meet my account, He is saying that I am certain that I
will be raised and then accounted for. Similar is His Word: On that Day Allah will pay
back to them in full their just reward, and they shall know that Allah is the Evident
Truth.
And as for His Word about the hypocrites: "You began to think diverse thought of
Allah," then this zann is doubt and not certainty. Zann is of two types: doubt and
surety. Therefore, that which is a matter of the Hereafter, then that is "the certainty" and
that which is of a worldly matter is "the doubt." Pay attention to what I have explained
for you.
The man said: "You have comfort me, O Commander of the Faithful! May Allah comfort
you!"
The Imam (AS) explained,
And so for His Word, the Blessed and Exalted: And We will set up a just balance on the
Day of Resurrection, so no soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least; that is the
balance of justice, all the creations will be taken to it on the Day of Judgment. Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, will grant credit to some of the creation from others with the
balances.
The compiler of this book says: In another tradition "the balance" stands for the
Prophets and their Successors (SA) (this one sentence is by the Compiler. The
passages after it are the continuation of the tradition.)
And as for His Word, the Mighty and High: Therefore, We will not set up a balance for
them on the Day of Resurrection, verily this is specifically. And as for His Word: These
shall enter the garden, in which they shall be given sustenance without measure.
Verily, the Messenger of Allah (SA) has said:
Allah, the Mighty and High, says: "Those who observe Me and love one another for My
Glory, deserve My love," or he said, "My honor. Verily, on the Day of Judgment their
faces will be of the light on the pulpits of light, over which shall be green cloths."
It was asked; "Who are they, O Messenger of Allah?"

286

He replied: "A group of people who are neither Prophets, not martyrs, but they are ones
who loved one another for the Glory of Allah. They will enter Paradise without any
accountability."
We ask Allah, the Mighty and High, to make us of them for His Mercy. As for His Word:
then as for him whose measure (of good deeds) is heavy...and as for him, whose
measure (of good deeds) is light, i.e. verily, it means the accountability. The good
deeds and the bad deeds will be weighed. The good deeds cause the balance to be
weighty and the bad deeds cause the balance to be light.
Then the Imam (AS) continued,
As for His Word: Say: The Angels of Death who is given charges of you takes your
souls, then to your Lord you shall be brought back, and His Word: Allah takes the souls
at the time of their death, and also His Word: Our messengers (angels) take his soul
away, and they are not remiss, and also His Word: Those whom the angels take away
their souls while they are unjust to themselves. And His Word: "those whom the angels
take away their souls in a good state, that Peace be on you."
Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, directs all affairs as He wills and He assigns from
His Creation whoever He wills and whatever He Wills. As for the Angels of Death, verily,
Allah assigns him specifically whoever He will from His Creation and he assigns His
Messengers from the angels specifically with whoever He wills of His Creation. The
angels which Allah, Mighty be His remembrance, has named and assigned them
specifically for whoever He wills from His Creation.
Verily, He, the Blessed and Exalted, directs the affairs however He pleases. Not all
knowledge makes capable a learned person of explaining to all the people, because
there are strong and weak (in understanding) among them. Also, because of them are
those who have the strength to bear it and of them are ones who cannot bear it, except
for whoever Allah eases the bearing and helps him over it from His beloved ones
specifically. Verily, it suffices you to know that Allah is the Reviver and the One who
makes to dies. And verily He it is that takes the souls away through whoever He wills of
His Creation from the His angels and other than angels.
The man said: "You have comforted me, O Commander of the Faithful! May Allah
comfort you! And may Allah benefit all the Muslims by you!"
Ali (AS) said to the man, "If Allah has expanded your chest for you with what I have
explained for you then you are, by the Splitter of Grain Seed and the Maker of
Humanity, from the true Believers."
The man asked, "O Commander of Faithful, how is it possible for me to find out that I
am of the true Believers?"
He (AS) replied:
No one knows that except for he who Allah has taught him with the tongue of His
Prophet (SA), and the Messenger of Allah (SA) has bore witness for him with Paradise.
Or he who Allah has expanded his chest to know what is in the Books which Allah, the
Mighty and High, has revealed over His Messengers and Prophets.
The man enquired, "O Commander of the Faithful, who has the strength for that?"
He (AS) explained, "Whoever Allah expands his chest and directs him to Himself. It is
up to you to serve Allah openly and secretly, for nothing equals worship."
The Compiler of this book says: The proof that the Producer is One and not more than
that is that if there were two then the matter is not free from being one of the two; that
each one of them is All-Powerful over prohibiting his associate form whatever He
intends, or that they are not All-Powerful. If it is so then it is possible for both of them to
be prevented, and whatever can be prevented has been brought into being. If they are
not All-Powerful, they are incapable and deficient, and only things with beginnings can
be as such. Therefore, it is correct that he One without Beginning One.
287

The second proof is that each one of them is not powerful enough to hide from the
other. Hence, if it is so, the one from whom one can hide, has a beginning. If he is not
All-Powerful then he is incapable, and anything which is incapable has beginning as we
have already explained earlier. This statement can be used to nullify the concept of two
eternal beings. What Mani and Ibn Daysan have professed is nothing but their own
superstition. The same nonsense which the Zoroastrians [majus] have professed
regarding the Devil [Ahriman] is equally invalid according to this argument. This
argument also applies to them. Thus, I have shortened my statement about both of
them and did not individually deal with what they asked him (AS).
6. Abd Al-Wahid ibn Muhammad ibn Abdus al-Naysaburi al-Attar (RA) said in Naysabur year
352 AH that Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Qutaybah al-Naysaburi said that

G G G H G " ~G" % U
H G G GHG H G d

G G 32 G" H G " G ~H G H 3 HG G % H G G % H G" G % H

I heard al-Fadl ibn Shadhan that when I was present, a dualist asked Abu al-Hasan Ali
ibn Musa al-Rida (ASsay: Verily, there are two producers of the Universe. Then
what is the proof that He is One?"
Consequently, he (AS) replied, "You statement: "Verily, He is two" is proof that He is
One, because you have not claimed the second except after ascertaining the One.
Therefore, One is agreed upon, and more than one is disagreed.

288

Chapter Thirty - Seven: Al-Radd ala alladhin qalu inna Allah
tahlithu thalatha: wa-ma-min ilah illa ilah Wahid The Refutation of
the Ones who Say that Allah is the Third of the Three: There is no
god but the One God - 1 tradition

G % G" H G " G E G H G "
1. My father said: Ahmad ibn Idris and Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Hammad, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of Yunus
ibn Abd al-Rahman that

G2 G H G *
G G I % m H G G G

G%G3$ O G%G3G G G G m % 2

m H G G% C q G q

H G G I GG H G7 I H G G

% 3 % L G G G _ G Z 2G

I H G " G H G *

I A

I G" 3/4
C G m

G H G O d m 2 G G G7 G
G d m 2 E 2 G Z I

G m
I G 1/4 G G G IG O G IG O GG

_ Z H G O H G O L

G G~H G G! G H G 2 G

G I E G OG G G G G!" G _ G % H G G G (R) $

m

I G G G~ I G IG
H G GG G G I I G Y G IG G G H G GL

G L G 4 G G H G *

E $ _G G3 L G " I G
G >

289

G2 d I G O % 3 G % 3$ G

G G 2 G Y GG G _ G 2 G Y d ~G(R) Y I I G >
G " G G % H G G%_ G G _ _

L G % 2 Y G I 3 G % 2 Y > G " 3 G % 2 Y > G " G

Y G I G % 2 GH G2 _ G %2 Y L % 2G G Y % 2 Y G " % H

G G!" G H I G I C I C d GE

H G " I G H G G G G H G " G G G I

G G m
I G " G Z G G I G G G G

G G G m H G" G 4

I G G G G H G " G G G G H G H G " I

2 Z > I G I G G

I G G G G G G G G G G G G%G G m G H G " I

H G " I G I G G

G G!" L G G NC G G

2 G G 3 L I

G I C G I I G I G I C C G G G C

G G G G G G H G I Z I Z I

G G H I G I G G G G GL G G G G
290

Z G Z d G H G *
H G d H G " I G2 G7 G G G G G%G H
_ I H d G G G 3 G GL G H G G2 I L
G 3

H m

Y G% G m _ G G m G G G G 3 Y G G G

G Y G G% G m _ G m G G G 3

G G I G I % 2G I G E G C G

H H I I L G G G G G

% 3 GH % 3 G!" H Z I Z I

3 G3 I G L E G %
G H I Y Z Z I G!

G H > % L _ I GE E

G% E G _ I H % C

G 3 G%G G!" G 3 G%G G G%G G %

G G G%G2 Y G G Z G G 2 Y G7 G % G I Y G

G%G2 Y G7 % C E G G

2 G i OG m G G%G3 I G%G G G%G3 I G%G G

G G G G G G G G G G G% G G G O

G _ G7 Z d m _ _ G ! G

G G G H G O GY >

291

G%G3G G7 G L I E H G I H E H _ G7 G m Z d I H % 3

G m G (R) G%G G G O

I E H G I G H q H 3 H G G 2H3 G " 3 G 3 G " G G

e
G G G%G G I H G " G%G G H
G q 3

C q 3

G m G G G G G _ G % _ G % 2 I

G I G 3 H 3

G%G aG G G G G G

m

HG" I H G H G "

I G I G " GL $ % G " G Z G

G H G G Y G G 2 G

GG H H~ G L G I G G E G I Z H_

Y G G G G Z G G I
>

H G G 2 I G G E 4
G H G G 2 >

G% G H G m GG iG G G G G G G G G % H G G G % H

Hisham ibn al-Hakam related the story of the Catholicos, primate of the Armenian
church of the Christians, who was named Burayhah, and had been the Catholicos for
seventy years. He used to research Islam, and sought to debate those Muslims who
were familiar with the Christian gospels, and who were familiar with the Messiah, his
attributes, arguments, and signs.
He says: He had been known for that until he became famous among the Christians,
Muslims, Jews, and Zoroastrians. The Christians use to be so proud of him that they
would say: "If there was no one on earth in the Christian faith except Burayhah that
would suffice us." He was seeker of the truth and with that, of Islam. He had a woman
292

with him that used to serve him and she had been with him for a long time. He use to
secretly tell her about the weakness of Christianity and its weak proofs.
He said: I came to know that from him.
Thus, Burayhah put this matter behind him, and approached the various Muslim
schools who differed a bout Islam, in search of the most learned one among them. He
came asking about the Muslim leaders, their pious one, their scholars, and t heir
leading intellectuals.
He examined every Muslim school of though, and found nothing that satisfied him.
He saif you leaders were on the true path, then they would have some truth with
them!" Finally, he learned about the Shiites from Hisham ibn al-Hakam.
Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman says: Hisham said to me.
I was sitting in my shop at the door of al-Karkh while a group of people were reciting
the Qur'an to me. I was suddenly taken aback by a group of Christian clergymen. There
were approximately one hundred men, dressed in the black clothing and chasubles (of
the Coptic priests) and the Great Catholicos. Burayhah was among them.
They came down around my shop and placed a chair for Burayhah to sit on. The
bishops and monks stood learning over their staffs, and on their heads were their
chasubles. Burayhah addressed me and saihave exhausted every single Muslim
theologian in debate regarding Christianity, and they had nothing that impressed me.
Hence, I have come to you wishing to debate Islam."
He says: Hisham laughed and said: "O Burayhah! If you expect me to give you the
same type of signs that he Messiah gave, you have come to the wrong place as I am not
the Messiah, not even close. I would never critics him, though, as he was one of the
purified ones, who was humble in character, yet sublime in spirituality. The Signs of
Allah wee manifest in him."
Burayhah responded, "Your words astonish me."
Hisham saif you want to argue then go ahead."
Burayhah said: "Yes. I certainly want to question you: What is the physical tie between
your Prophet and the Messiah?'
Hisham replied, "He is the son of his maternal grandfather, because Jesus is from the
children of Ishaq, and Muhammad (SA) is from the children of Ismail."
Burayhah asked,
How do you relate him to his father?"
Hisham answered, "If you want his lineage from your view, I will inform you of it, and if
yo want his linage according to us, I will inform you of that."
Burayhah enquired, "I want his lineage according to us." Burayhah says that I was
thinking that if he described his lineage according to us, I would overpower him. So I
said: "Describe his lineage the way we relate it."
Hisham explained, "Yes. You say: "He is without beginning from the one without
beginning. Then who is the Father and who is the Son?"
Burayhah saie who came unto the Earth is the Son."
Hisham asked, "He who came unto the Earth is the Father."
He said: "The Son is the messenger of the Father."
Hisham added, "Verily, the Father is wiser than the Son, because the Father is the
Creator."
Burayhah said: "Verily, the Father and the Son are both the Creators."
Hisham continued, "What prevented them from coming down to Earth together like they
were together when they created the world?"
Burayhah replied, "How do they associate while they are both one thing? They differ
only by name."
Hisham responded, "Verily, they unite with the name."
Burayhah said: "This statement is unknown."
293

Hisham said: "This statement is well-known,"
Burayhah responded, "Verily, the Son is connected to the Father."
Hisham replied, "Verily, the Son is disconnected from the Father."
He replied, "This is contrary to what the people would think."
Hisham explained, "If what the people think is true, then I have overcome you for the
Father was when the Son was not. Is that what you are saying, O Burayhah?"
He answered, "I do not say this."
Hisham responded, "Then why did you seek to confirm your beliefs on the beliefs of
those whom you reject?"
He said: "Verily, the Father is a name and the Son is a name, and the eternal has
decreed them."
Hisham said: "Are the two names without beginning? Are they eternal like the Father
and the Son?
Burayhah declared, "No, The names are accidental (ones with beginning.)"
He responded, "You have certainly made the Father a Son, and the Son a Father. If the
Son brought these names about, and not the Father, then he is the Father. And if the
Father brought these names about, and not the Son, then he is the Father, and the Son
is the Father. Thus, there is no Son here."
Burayhah said: "Verily, the Son is a name of the Holy Spirit when it came down to the
Earth."
Hisham responded, "What was its name prior to coming down to Earth?"
Burayhah continued on, bafflets name is the Son whether it came down or did not
came down."
Hisham advocated, "So before the coming down of this Spirit, it was all one but it had
two names."
He sait is all one; one Spirit."
Hisham acclaimed, "You are pleased to make some of it the Son and some of it the
Father."
Burayhah replied, "No, because the name of the Father and the name of the Son are
one."
Hisham said: "Therefore, the Son is the Father of the Father, and the Father is Father of
the Son, and there is one Son."
The bishops said to Burayhah with one voice: "Nothing like this has ever happened to
you, stand up!"
Thus, Burayhah was confused and wanted to leave, so Hisham attached and said:
What prevents you from embracing Islam? Is there any rancour in your heart? Then say
it, otherwise I will ask you a question about Christianity. I will give you the night to think
about it. Then, when you wakeup, you will only be interested in me.
The bishops said: "Do not ask him the question, for it may create doubts about your
faith."
Burayhah said: "Say it, O father of al-Hakam."
Hisham went on, "Tell me, does the Son know everything that the Father does?"
He answered, "Yes."
Hisham asked, "Tell me, does the Father know everything that is with the Son?"
He answered, "Yes."
Hisham asked, "Tell me, does the Son have power over everything that the Father has
power over?"
He answered, "Yes."
Hisham asked, "Tell me, does the Father have power over everything which the Son has
power over?"
He answered, "Yes."
294

Hisham responded, "Then how can one of them be the Son of his partner, while they
are both equal, and how does each one of them oppress his partner?"
Burayhah said; "There is no oppression between them."
Hisham continued, "The truth between them is that the Son is the Father of the Father,
and the Father is the Son of the Son. Spend the night thinking about this, O Burayhah."
The Christians dispersed, and they were wishing that they had never seen Hisham and
his friends.
Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman says: Burayhah returned in grief and anxiety till he reached
his home. The woman that served him asked him, "Why is it that I see you grieved and
anxious/" Hence, he related to her the debate between Hisham and him. She asked,
"Woe unto you! Do you want to follow truth or falsehood?"
Burayhah replied, "Truth, of course."
She said to him, "Wherever you find truth, then turn to it. Be careful of obstinacy. For
verily, obstinacy is doubt, doubt is calamity, and those with doubt are in Hell."
The reporter says: He agreed with her statement and decided to go to Hisham the next
morning. The next morning he went to Hisham when none of his companions were with
him. He enquired, "O Hisham! Do you have someone whose views and words you turn
to, and profess his obedience?"
Hisham answered, "Yes, O Burayhah."
"What is his description?"
"Are you asking about his lineage or his religion?" Hisham replied,
He said: "Both of them, the description of his lineage and his religion."
Hisham responded,
As for his lineage, it is the best of the lineages: He is the leader of the Arabs, the best of
the Quraysh, and the most distinguished of the Hashimites. Whoever argued about his
lineage always found it to be better than his own, because the Quraysh are the best of
the Arabs, and the Hashimites are the best of the Quraysh. And, as he is the best of the
Hashimites, he is the most pious among them, and their master. He descends from the
children of the master, who are better than all other children. He is the son of the
master.
He said: "Describe his religion."
Hisham saiis law or description of body and his purity?"
He said: "Describe his body and his purity/"
Hisham described,
He is infallible; thus, he does not sin. He is generous; hence, he does not act miserly.
He is brave; so he does not act cowardly. He has been bestowed with knowledge;
therefore, he does not act ignorantly. He is the Protector of the Religion, firm in what is
made mandatory. He is from the Progeny of the Prophets (AS), and the Vessel of
Prophetic Knowledge (AS). He pardons when he is angry. He is fair in times of
oppression. He helps when pleased, and is just towards both friend and foe. He does
not ask of deviation for his enemy and foes not prohibit benefiting his friends. He
practices the Book and speaks wonders. He is one of the Purified Ones. He relates the
words of the Divinely Elected Leaders without violating their Proof. He is not ignorant
of any question. He can derive a ruling [fatwa] from any tradition, and makes clear all
darkness.
Burayhah responded, "You have described the Messiah in his attributes, and proved
him by his proofs and signs, except that you have applied this description to another
person. If there is a person who fits this description, we will believe in him."
Hisham saif you believe you will be guided, and if you follow the truth you will not
be blamed." He then added, "O Burayhah! There is not a proof which Allah establishes
over the first of His Creation, except that He establishes it over the middle creation and
295

the last creation. Therefore, Proofs do not become invalidated, just like nations and
practices do not disappear."
Burayhah admitted, "How close is this to righteousness, and how near it is to the truth.
This is the attribute of the wise. They establish proof that negates suspicion."
Hisham said: "Yes."
Then they both departed together until they arrived at Medina. The woman was with
them. They both wanted to see Abu Abd Allah (AS). However, they met Musa ibn Jafar
(AS), so Hisham related to him the account. When he finished, Musa ibn Jafar (AS)
said: "O Burayhah! How is your knowledge of your Book (the bible)?"
He answered, "I am knowledgeable of it."
The Imam (AS) asked, "How is your faith in its interpretation?"
He replied. "I am confident that I am knowledgeable about it."
The reported says: Musa ibn Jafar (AS) began reading the Bible. Burayhah responded,
"The Messiah must have read like this, and no one has read this recitation but the
Messiah."
Burayhah then saihave been seeking you or someone like you for the past fifty
years."
The reporter says: Therefore, he embraced Islam and so did the woman, and both were
expediently faithful. The Hisham, Burayhah, and the woman entered the presence of
Abu Abd Allah (AS). Hisham related the account and the discussion that took place
between Musa (AS) and Burayhah.
Thus Abu Abd Allah (AS) read: Offspring one of the other; and Allah is Hearing,
Knowing.
So Burayhah asked, "May I be your ransom! How do you view the Torah, the Bible and
the Books of the Prophets?"
Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied: "We are their Heirs. We read them the way they were
originally read, and we convey them as they were originally conveyed. Verily, Allah
does not place a Proof [hujjat] on His earth who, when questioned about something,
answers: I do not know.'"
Hence, Burayhah remained with Abu Abd Allah (AS) until Abu Abd Allah passed away.
Then he remained with Musa ibn Jafar (AS) until Burayhah died in his time. The Imam
(AS) washed his corpse with his own hands, shrouded his body, and placed him in the
grave and said: "This is a disciple from the disciples of the Messiah, who recognized
the right of Allah over him."
The reported says: Thus, most of the Companions of the Imam (AS) wished they were
like him.

296

Chapter Thirty-Eight: Dhikr Azamat Allah, jalla Jalalahu. The
Remembrance of Allah's Greatness, Mighty be His Glory - 11
traditions

% o
1. My father (may Allah have mercy on them) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ibrahim ibn
Hashim and others said, on the authority of Khalaf ibn Hammad, on the authority of al-Husayn
ibn Zayd al-Hashimi, that

HI G G3 L G%G3 G G G G Y G!" H q > : G G2 G
G q G GG 3 L 3 L G 3 G " I H G G I G
d G H G" Ge G E G L G L G G 3 % H G(R) _ GG d GL G G "
I IG G G G H G " H G G G _ d G H G G
E G aE G7 E I 3 GH G G I G IG G 3 E G aE G7 E I 3 GH G
E 2 G G 3 H G G

2
G G >

G G G G G G G %
_ 2
_ 2
H E G aE G7 E G k

_ 2
H E G aE G7 E >

G >
k

_ 2
H E G aE G7 E G G {

E G aE G7 E G I G G {
k
G 2
2 >

_ 2

% G G 3 H E G aE G7 E H G I G {
k
2 >

_ 2

k

H E G aE G7 E G

2 >
H G 3 E G aE G7 E I GH G I IG

H G!" H E G aE G7 E G G H G G H G G E G aE

297

G 2 G 2

2 2
H G _ G G 3 H E G aE G7 E G G 2 G G
E G IG E 2G G G

2 G I E G aE G7 E G G 2 G

2 2

3 G H G I G q G 2 G

2 2

3 H E G aE G7 E _ G n

2 2

H G G G C G I G >

2 2

H G G 3 H E G aE G7 E

.GG H G " H H G " % G " m H G " % G 3

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Zaynab, the squint-eyed perfume lady, came to the wives of the Messenger of Allah
(SA) and his daughters. The Messenger of Allah (SA) entered when she was with them.
So he (SA) said to her, "When you visit us our houses are filled with perfume."
Hence, she replied, "Your house is the most pleasant due to your own scent, O
Messenger of Allah."
He (SA) said: "When you sell, then be good. However, do not engage in deceptive
marketing for that is not a good practice for ensuring wealth."
She responded, "I did no come with something to sell. Verily, I came to ask you about
ht Greatness of Allah."
Thus, he (SA) sailory be to Allah! Let me share His Greatness with you."
The reporter says: then he (SA) continued,
Verily, the planet earth and everything it contains is like a ring in the vastness of the
desert to the one which is below it. The earth and the one below it, and everything they
contain, are like a ring in the vastness of the desert to the one that is below them. This
how they are until it reaches the seventh one.
Then he recited this verse: Allah is He who created seven heavens, and the Earth the
like of them.
The seven heavens and what they contain are on the back of a rooster like a ring in the
open desert. The rooster has two wings; one in the East and the other in the West, and
its feet are on the borderline. The seven heavens, the rooster, and whatever they
contain, are on a rock like a ring in the open desert. The seven heavens, the rooster, the
rock and whatever is in them, are on the back of a fish like a ring in the open desert.
The seven heavens, the rooster, the rock, and the fish are in a dark ocean like a ring in
the vast desert. The seven heavens, the rooster, the rock, the fish, and the dark ocean
are in the air like a ring in the open desert. The seven heave ns, the rooster, the rock,
the fish, the dark ocean, and the air are beneath the ground like a ring in the open
desert.
Then he (SA) recited this verse: His is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth,
and what is between them two, and what is beneath the ground.
Then the tradition stopped.
298

The seven heavens, the rooster, the rock, the fish, the dark ocean, the air, the ground,
and whatever is in them are in heaven like a ring in the open desert.
All of these things, the heaven of this world, and whatever is in them, are like a ring in
the open desert. All of these things and the two heavens are like a ring in the open
desert compared to the third heaven. The third heaven and whatever is in it is like a ring
in the open desert compared to the fourth heaven, and so on until the seventh heaven.
These seven heavens and whatever is in them are like a ring in the open desert
compared to the ocean which covers the earth. The seven heavens, and the ocean
which covers the earth, are like a ring in the open desert compared to the mountain.
Then he (AS) read this verse: And He sends down from heavens (clouds like)
mountains laden with hail.
These seven heavens, the covered ocean and the mountain are like a ring in the open
desert compared to the veils of light. There are seventy thousand of these blinding veils
light. The seven heavens, the covered oceans, the mountains, and the veils are like a
ring in the open-spaced desert in comparison to the air, in which the hearts are fervent.
Then he (AS) read this verse His Throne extends over the heavens and the earth, and
the preservation of them both tires Him not, and He is the Most High, the Great.
The seven heavens, the covered oceans, the mountains, the veils, the air, and the
Throne are like a ring in the open desert compared to the Empyrean.
Then he (AS) read this verse: The Most Compassionate Allah is Firm on the Empyrean.
The angels cannot carry it except with the statement "there is no god but Allah" and
"there is no power and no strength save in Allah."
2. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn Isa said, on the authority of
al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Amr ibn Shimr, on the authority of Jabir ibn Yazid
that

E G E G E 2 G7 G H G G G H H G%G }

E G" E G G Z H G Z H
Z I % _ % 2 m

H 3 G H G" H 3 H I C G 3 G

I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) about the Word of the Mighty and High: He (AS) said:
O Jabir! After Allah, the Mighty and High, destroys this creation, placing the people of
Paradise in Paradise, and the people of Hell in Hell, He will recreate another world
different from this one without men or women, to serve Him and profess His Unity. He
will create for them an earth different form this one. And He will create for them a
firmament different from the earth to give them shade. Perhaps you think that Allah
only created this world, and that Allah has not created other beings than you. No,
299

certainly not. Allah has created millions of worlds, and millions of human creations.
And you re the last of those worlds, and the last of those beings.
3. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said: Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakariyya said: Bakr ibn Abd
Allah ibn Hubayb said, on the authority of Tamim ibn Buhlul, on the authority of Nasr ibn
Muzahim al-Minqari, on the authority of Amr ibn Sad, on the authority of Abu Mikhnaf Lut ibn
Yahya, on the authority of Abu Mansur, on the authority of Zayd ibn Wahab that

G Z 2G % L H ! G G EqG G C G GG G G :

G G!" 2 I G Z H Z G O ! 2 3 H G " H G%

G G 2G G m G C G GL_ I G G%G G

E G C m I G G% G G% G E G OG 2 O G

G % I G G%G3 G!" >

GL G I G I G G G G G%G I G"G

Y G7 G I G G% G!"

G E G OGG G I G G G _ E G OGG G

E G _ 2 E GOG % E G OGG G I G G G _ Z G
2 G H

2 I G
I G I G I G I G G H H I G E _ H E

I G 2 I G I G I G I G

E G _ G G q G I I I G

2 E G
2

H E G OGG G E G

C H k

H >

300

The Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib was asked about the Omnipotence of
Allah, Exalted and Glorified be He. Therefore, he (AS) stood up, delivered a sermon
praising and exalting Allah. He then said:
Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has created angels that are so enormous that
they cannot fly down to the earth due to the sheer size of their numerous wings. Among
them is an angel that is so huge that even if jinn and humankind worked together to
describe him, they would be unable to do so due to the distance between its joints and
the beauty of its composed image.
How can one be described which has seven hundred years of distance between its
shoulders and its earlobes? Among them is one who obstructs the horizon with one of
its many wings without the complete enormity of its body. Among them is one who is
so tall that the heavens merely reach his waist. And among them is one whose feet float
in the atmosphere and its knees reach the earth. There is also an angel who is so huge
that all of the water on earth would fit in the cavity of his thumb. There is also one who
is so hug that if ships were cast into the tears of its eyes, they could sail for the rest of
eternity. Blessed is Allah, the Best of the Creators.
He (AS) was questioned about the veils, so he answered,
The first of the veils are seven in number. The thickness of each veil is five hundred
years of travel. And the distance between the two veils is the distance traveled in five
hundred years. The third veil is composed of seventy veils. Between each veil is the
distance traveled in five hundred years. The length of each veil is five hundred years of
travel.
There are seventy thousand angels acting as the gatekeepers for every veil. The
strength of each one of these angels is equal to the strength of all the jinn and men.
They are the source of darkness, light, fire, smoke, clouds, lightning, rain, thunder,
glow, sand, mountain, dust, water and all rivers. There are different veils. The thickness
of each one of these veils is the distance traveled over the course of seventy thousand
years.
Then there are the Canopies of Glory [jalal], and there are seventy such canopies. In
each canopy there are seventy angels. Between each canopy is the distance traveled
during five hundred years.
Then there is the Canopy of Mighty [izz]; then the Canopy of Pride [kibriya]; then the
canopy of Greatness [azamah]; then the Canopy of Sacredness [qudus]; then the
Canopy of Power [jabarut]; and then the Canopy of Pride [fakhr]. Then is the white light,
then the Canopy of Oneness [wahdaniyah], which spans the distance traveled over
seventy thousand years into seventy thousand years; and then there is the Most
Sublime Veil.
Hence, his (AS) speech ended and he became silent.
Therefore, Umar said to him (AS), "I do not want to remain for a day when I do not see
you, O Father of al-Hasan."
4. Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Abd Allah ibn Ahmad al-Aswari said: Makki ibn Ahmad ibn Sadwayh
al-BurdhaI said: Uday ibn Ahmad ibn abd al-Baqi Abu Umayr reported to us in Adhanah
that Abu al-Hasan Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Bura' said: Abd al-Munim ibn Idris said: My
father related to me, on the authority of Wahab, on the authority of Ibn Abbas that

G G 3 G7 G Z G ! 2 3 H _ G H G

G G 3 G7 G ! 2 3 % H H G G G O G

301

_ G G H G " 2 m

G (R) G G Y G " G

2

G G L 2H G G (R) C C H G " % G"

G G L 2H G G (R) G G H

2 G G

G H GG H G % G 3

_ d G G%G mG L 3 A

.
The Prophet (SA) said: Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has create a rooster
whose feet are on the borderline of the lowly seventh earth, while its head is in the
Empyrean, and its neck is twisted below the Empyrean. It is an angel among the angels
of Allah, the Mighty and High. Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has placed its feet at the
lowest level of the seventh earth. It crosses the earths, to the end of the earths, until it
comes out at the horizon of heaven. Then it passes the horizon until its first visible part
reaches the Empyrean, while it says: "Glory be to You, my Lord."
Verily, this rooster has two wings. If it would spread them out, they would cross both
the East and the West. When it is the end of the night, it spreads its two wings, shakes
them, and it calls out with the glorification that "Glory be to Allah, the Sovereign, the
Most Holy. Glory be to the Great, the Supreme Being [al-mutal], the Most Holy. There is
no god but He, the Ever-Living, the Self-Subsistent."
When it says so then all the roosters of the earth glorify, spread their wings, and begin
to crow. And when that rooster becomes still then the rooster on the earth become still.
At the time of dawn, it spreads its two wings, which cross the East and the West, and
shakes them, and calls out with the glorification: "Glory be to Allah, the Great. Glory be
to Allah, the Honorable, the Subduer. Glory be to Allah, the Possessor of the Glorious
Empyrean. Glory be to Allah, the Lord of the Lofty Empyrean."
When it does that then all the roosters of the earth do their glorification. Therefore, it
wakes the rooster of the earth, who awake and answer its glorification of Allah, the
Mighty and High. The rooster ahs the purest white feathers I have ever seen. Below its
white feathers it has the darkest green fuzz that I have ever seen. I am still longing to
look at the feathers of that rooster.
5. With the same chain of transmission that
302

G Y G G O G Z ! 2 3 H G " : _ G H G
E G G G O H G H H q
E % >

2 G
G 3

_ GH G H Z _ H I H GH G G

The Prophet (SA) said:
Verily, among the angels of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is an angel whose upper
half is composed of fire, while its lower half is composed of ice. Neither does the fire
melt ice, nor does the ice extinguish the fire. He stands calling with his high-pitched
voice: "Glory be to Allah, who withholds the heat of this fire so that it does not melt this
ice; and Glory be to Allah who withholds the coldness of this ice so that it does not
extinguish this fire. O Allah! O Combiner of the Ice and fire! Unite the hearts of Your
Believing Servants in Your Obedience."
6. With the same chain of transmission that

_2 m H G " G G G 2 G 4 Z G O ! 2 3 H G " : _ G H G

G 2 G G IG G!" I G G
E G >

The Prophet (SA) said:
Verily, among the angels of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, are angels who glorify
Allah, the Mighty and High, with the entirety of their beings, praising Him in every
direction with different voices. They do not lift their heads to heaven, nor do they lower
them to their feet from crying and fear of Allah, the Mighty and High.
7. Muhammad ibn Musa al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said,
on the authority of Musa ibn Imran al-NakahI, on the authority of his paternal uncle alHusayn ibn Yazid, on the authority of Ismail ibn Muslim that Abu Rahman ibn Abu Dharr, on
the authority of Abu Dharr al-Ghifari (may the mercy of Allah be upon him) that

G!" G Z G 4 _ G H G G Z G$ L : G% G G_ G E G

303

G L 3
H G O I Z G k

H ! % G GeG G G G G~ d3 G _

G O IG 3d G%G G G G 7 G H_ G G G m G G G G G G

G k

H _ G7 I G G 3 H % G 2 H G 3 2 G GH

% G I G G G 3 3 Z O 3 H E G G L G 2 I G ~d C G H

H G G G G > C G " .> _

G L 3 m G G

. G H G G L H % G E Z Z G
I was holding the hand of the Prophet (SA) and we were both walking. We were looking
at the sun and until it set, So I asked, "O Messenger of Allah! Where does it set?"
[(Editor's footnote: This traditionis strange (gharib). As they do not agree with scientific
fact, the words that follow cannot be attributed to the Prophet (SA)]
He (SA) replied,
The sun sets in the sky then it rises from the sky to another sky, until it rises to the
seventh highest sky, which is below the Empyrean. Then, the sun prostrates, and the
angels which are entrusted with it prostrate themselves along with it. At this point, the
sun says: "O my Lord! Do you command me to rise from the West or from my place of
rising (the East)?" According to the Word of the Exalted: Abd the sun runs onto a term
appointed for it; that is the ordinance of the Mighty, the Knowing. What He means is
that He, the Mighty Lord, knows the Realm He has created.
He said: Then Jibrail comes to the sun with a dress which glows with the Light of the
Empyrean and fixes the times of day, making them lengthy during the summer, short
during the winter, and intermediate length during the call and spring. He said: Thus, the
sun wears that dress like anyone of you wear your dress, then it brightens up with it the
horizon of the heaven until it rises from the place of rising.
The Prophet (SA) said: It is as if I am looking at it, and it is confined for three nights,
then it dresses with the glow, and is commanded to rise from the West. That is the
Word of the Mighty and High: When the sun is covered, and when the starts darken.
The moon is similar in its place of rising, and its trajectory in the horizon of heaven. Its
setting is it is rising to the seventh heaven. It prostrates below the Empyrean then
Jibra'il comes to it with a dress of light from the Throne. According to the Word of the
Mighty and High He made the sun a shinng brightness and the moon a light.
Abu Dharr (RA) says: "I then withdrew with the Messenger of Allah (SA) and we prayed
the Maghrib prayers.

304

8. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar (RA) said: My father said: al-Husayn ibn alHasan ibn Aban related to us, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Auramah, o the authority of
Ziyad ibn al-Qandi, on the authority of Durust, on the authority of a man that

E G OGG G G%G G!" G%G G Z ! 2 3 H G " : G G 2 G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has created an angel who is so huge that it
would take a fluttering bird five hundred years to fly from its earlobe to its neck."
9. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Ahmad ibn Idris said, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of al-Sayyari, on the authority of Abd
Allah ibn Hammad, on the authority of Jamil ibn Durraj that

G7 H G " G G _ G%G G G~ Y G G
H >

H H I G GO IG E G OGG G G Z G 2 G 2
E% _ G7E E _ G7 E G OG

E G G H H _2 m H G "
.% 2G % G % G 2 m

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS). "Are there oceans in heaven?"
He replied,
Yes. My father related to me, on the authority of his father, and he on the authority of
his grandfather (AS) that the Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
Verily, in the seven heavens there are oceans, the depths of which are like the distance
traveled over the course of five hundred years. In them are angels who have been
standing in service since they were created by Allah, the Mighty and High. The water
barely reaches their knees. There is not an angel among them but that he has fourteen
hundred wings. On each wing, there are four faces. On each face there are four
tongues. And there is no a single wing or a single tongue or a single mouth but this it
glorifies Allah, the Mighty and High, with a glorification that does not resemble in any
way the prayers of the others.
10. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar
said, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan ibn Aban, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Auramah, on the authority of Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Maythami, on the authority of Abu alHasan al-Sharif, on the authority of Sad ibn Tarif; on the authority of Asbagh ibn Nubatah
that
305

G G G7 H G " G GG G GG G G G!" G H : 3 2 G G 2 G
G 3 G C G G % G H G H > Z H

H G " G H GG G % % G % 3 G >
E G G G7 Z ! 2 3 H H G " H E G7 G O ! 2 3

G G G G7 G G G7 G %

G L 3 b %

G GL 3 G % H G H L A

H G G H G G H H q

_G _ % H G H _GH _ Z H H I % (c)
G H G " % G " I G
_ G G C G G O C

_ G % G % 3 G >
.

Ibn al-Kawwa' came to the Commander of the Faithful (AS) and said: "O Commander of
the Faithful! By Allah, verily there is a verse in the Book of Allah, the Mighty and High,
that has destroyed my heart, making me doubt my religion."
Ali (AS) said to him, "May your mother be bereaved of you and be deprived of you!
What is that verse?"
He replied, "The Word of Allah, the Exalted: The birds with expanded wings, each
knows its own prayer, and its own glorification."
Imam Ali (AS) responded,
O son of al-Kawwa'! Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has created angels in
different shapes. There is an angel of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, in the shape of a
rooster, which is hoarse and gray. Its talons are in the seventh lowly earth and its dual
comb is below the Empyrean. It has two wings; one in the East and the other in the
West. One is of fire and the other is of ice.
When the time of prayer comes, it stands on its talons and raises its neck from below
the Empyrean, and then it flaps its two wings like the roosters in your houses do.
Neither the one that is from fire melts the ice, nor does the one form the ice put out the
fire. At that point it calls:
I bear witness that there is no got but Allah, He Alone, there is no associate with Him;
and I bear witness that Muhammad is the Master of the Prophets and his successor is
the Master of the Successors and that Allah is the Most Praised, the Most Holy, Lord of
the Angels and the Spirit (Ruh).
He said: Then the roosters in your homes flap their wings and answer him in his call,
and that is the Word of the Exalted: The birds with expanded wings, each knows its
own prayer and its own glorification" from the roosters in the earth.
306

11. My father (may Allah have mercy on them) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority
of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ali, on the authority of
Yunus ibn Yaqub, on the authority of Amr ibn Marwan that

m E G I Y E G I Y Z G O ! 2 3 H G " : G G2 G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"Verily, half of the angels of Allah, the Blessed and the Exalted, are in cold and half are
in fire. They say: O Combiner of Hot and Cold, keep our hearts firm in Your
Obedience.'"
The Compiler of this book says: Allah willing, I will publish the traditions which I have
transmitted regarding remembering the Greatness of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, in
the book al-Azamat.'

307

Chapter Thirty-Nine: Mana Lutf Allah Tabaraka wa-Taala. The
Subtlety of Allah, the Blessed, the Exalted - 1 tradition

! 23
1. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa on the authority of his father on the
authority of Said ibn Janah on the authority of some of our scholars that

G 2 G Z : G G2 G
. G G G G _ % G G%G H G " 4 G G G7 G G G G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Among the smallest things crated by Allah is the mosquito [baud], and the gnat [jirjis],
which is smaller than the mosquito. And that what you name [al-walgh], which is even
smaller than a gnat. What is in an elephant is found in a mosquito; except for the
mosquito has been given preference over the elephant by two wings.

308

Chapter Forty: Adna Ma Yujzi min Marifat al-Tawhid. The Least
Required for Recognizing Diving Unity - 5 traditions

1. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn
Hashim said, on the authority of Mukhtar ibn Muhammad ibn Mukhtar al-Hamdani, on the
authority of al-Fath ibn Yazid al-Jurjani that

G % H G % % 2 G % G " % H dG G G G ~ % d : G G
. 4 G%G G % H E G L 2
I asked Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim (AS) about the least that is required to recognize Divine
Unity. Thus, he (SA) replied, "the confirmation that there is no god other than Him. He
has no peer or rival. He is Eternal without beginning. He is the Firm, the Existent, and is
never Absent. There is nothing whatsoever like unto Him."
2. Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of alNadr ibn Suwayd, on the authority of Asim Humayd that

H G " G G H G G C G G
G G G7 % H G H H

G G G G%G G!" GG G G >
G C >

. G
Ali ibn al-Husayn (AS) was asked about Divine Unity; hence, he said Verily, Allah, the
Mighty and High, knew that there would be people in the Last Days who would think
deeply; therefore, Allah, the Mighty and High, revealed: Say: He Allah is One. Allah is
the Needless and the first few verses from the Chapter "the Iron" until He says: And He
is Cognizant of what is in the hearts. Thus whosoever goes beyond that is ruined.
3. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Isamil al-Barmaki said: al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan related to
me that Bakr ibn Ziyad related tome, on the authority of Abd al-Aziz ibn al-Muhtda that

309

m

I G $ C G G H G _ L d

m

I asked al-Rida (AS) about Diving Unity; hence, he replied, "All those who read: Say: He
Allah is One, and believe in it, have professed their faith in Divine Unity."
I asked, "How should one read it?"
He (AS) responded, "The same way that the people read it, adding such is my Lord'
three times."
4. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) both said: Muhammad
ibn Yahya al-Attar, and Ahmad ibn Idris both said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad,
,on the authority of some our scholars, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Tahi, on the
authority of Tahir ibn Hatim ibn Mahawayh that

4 G%G G q G%G G G G G G 3 G H
G G m q_G H G!" L 2
. G G H Z G Z G Z G
I wrote to al-Tayyib i.e. Abu al-Hasan Musa (AS): "What is the least required to
recognize the Creator? Thus he (AS) wrote back: "there is nothing whatsoever like unto
Him. He has always been All-Hearing, All-Knowing, All-Seeing, and He is the Mighty
Doer of whatever He wills.
5. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) related to me, on the authority of his paternal uncle
Muhammad ibn Abu al-Qasim, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Yali al-Kufi, on the authority
of Juwaybir, on the authority of al-Dahhak, on the authority of Ibn Abbas that

G G7 L G G qGG O A
G G _ G _ G H G!" G

G%G G G G G G G

G H G G G % H E G E%2 G E G G % G G%G G H

A Bedouin Arab came to the Prophet (SA) and said: "O Messenger of Allah! Teach me
the wonders of knowledge." The Prophet (SA) asked, "Before you ask about the
wonders of knowledge, do you know about the beginning of knowledge?"
The man enquired, "What is the beginning of knowledge, O Messenger of Allah?"
Hence, he (SA) replied, "Recognizing Allah the way He deserves to be recognized."
310

The Bedouin further asked, "And how does Allah deserve to be recognized?"
He answered,
You have recognized Allah as He deserves to be recognized when you recognize that
nothing resembles Him, that He has no compeer, and without any equal, that He is One,
Alone, Manifest, the First and the Last, without parallel and without a rival. This is how
He deserves to be recognized.

311

Chapter Forty - One: Innahu, azza wa jalla, la Yurafu illa Bihi. He,
the Mighty and High, in not Recognized, Except by Himself. - 10
traditions

1. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
Muhammad ibn Yaqub al-Kulayni said: Muhammad ibn Ismail said, on the authority of alFadl ibn Shadhan, on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Mansur ibn Hazim
that

H G " I L Z > a
m 2G G G%G G m G o

I said to Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "Verily, I debated with a group of people and
said to them, Verily, Allah is far above being recognized through His Creation. In fact,
the servants are those who are recognized through Allah."
He replied, "May Allah have mercy on you!"
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of some of
our scholars, on the authority of Ali ibn Uqbah ibn Qays ibn Saman ibn Abu Rabihah, the
freed slave of the Messenger of Allah (SA), who hurried the transmission that

G GG G G : % G G ! G G
G G G G 2 G _ G
_ G C % I G 2 % Y

% m E 4 _ % 4 m E 4 _ G

m

2 E G E 4 G E G G G E G E 4 G7 E G G7 G
. E 4 _G

The Commander of the Faithful was questioned, "With what do you recognize your
Lord?" He (AS) answered, "With what He introduced Himself." It was saiow did He
introduce Himself to you?" He (AS) replied, No image resembles Him. He is neither
perceived by the senses, nor compared with the people. He is Near in His Farness, and
Far in His Nearness. He is Above all Things. It cannot be said that "something is above
Him," as He is in front of everything. It cannot be said that "He has a front," since He is
Inside Everything, but without being contained. He is Outside of Everything, but without
312

being absent from anything. Glory be Him! There is nothing like unto Him. He is the
Originator of All Things.
3. My father (RA) related to me that Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Humran, on the authority of al-Fadl ibn al-Sakan, on the authority of Abu Abd
Allah AS) that

G GG G! G _ G H GG

The Commander of the Faithful said: "Recognize Allah through Allah, the Messenger
through the message, and the ones vested with authority [ulu al-amr] through their
beneficence, justice, and good deeds."
4. Abu al-Husayn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Farisi said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Abu Said al-Nisawi said: Abu Nasr Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abd Allah al-Sughdi said in
Marw that Muhammad ibn Yaqub ibn al-Hakam al-Askari and his brother Muadh ibn Yaqub
both said: Muhammad ibn Sinan al-Hanzali said: Abd Allah ibn Asim said: Abd al-Rahman
ibn Qays said, on the authority of Abu Hashim al-Rummani, on the authority of Zadhan that

I % d G O % d EqG G G _ G GG G G G!" G H % 2 G En %

EqG G C G H H GG Z H L

E G G%G % G H H GG Z H L

. E E%2 G G % Y I
H % G O I E G " % G E I G " E G

Salman the Persian related the following detailed tradition concerning the coming of
the Catholicos to Median with one hundred Christians and asking Abu Bakr questions.
He could not answer so he guided them to the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu
Talib (AS). Therefore, he asked Ali (AS) some questions; thus, he answered them all.
Among the questions the Catholicos asked him was: "Tell me. Did you recognize Allah
through Muhammad or di you recognize Muhammad through Allah, the Mighty and
High?" Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) replied, I did not recognize Allah through Muhammad
(SA), but I recognized Muhammad through Allah, the Mighty and High, when He created
him and made in him the size of the length and breadth. Hence I recognized that He was
the Planner of the Produced through reasoning, and inspiration, the same way He
inspired His Angels to recognize and obey Him without any compeer and quality.
The Compiler of this book says: The tradition is long. We have extracted from it the required
passage. I have transmitted all of it in the end of the book Al-Nubuwwah.
5. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said:
Muhammad ibn Yaqub said:
313

G H G C G G7 E G Z Z G %G2 m H H G

G % 2 G % 2 G I 2 % x }_ q 2

G G m GC G G 2 G G

The meaning of" "recognize Allah through Allah" is that Allah, the Mighty and High,
created persons, colors, and substances. Therefore, the essences are bodies and the
substances are spirits. He, the Mighty and High, resembles neither body nor spirit.
Nobody has any effect or cause in creation of a sensitive, perceiving spirit. He is
Matchless in the creation of spirits, and bodies. Therefore, whoever negates from Him
the two likenesses - the likeness of bodies and the likeness of spirits - recognizes
Allah through Allah. And whoever views Him as a body, a spirit or a light, has not
recognized Allah through Allah.
6. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamdani (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the
authority of is father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sinan, on the authority of Ziyad ibn alMundhar, on the authority of Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (AS), on the authority of
his father, on the authority of his grandfather (AS) that

G GG G G G!" Z H G " : % H G _ G%G
G G 2 E G G G H E} G

L a_ G G L H _ I G Y G G G H L

E G!" > Y > n
G 2 G _ H L G GO

G G! G % H G L 2 G %3n

. G L 2 d G~ I G G o
G H L G G%GO G G%G
Verily, a man stood before the Commander of the Faithful (AS) and asked, "O
Commander of the Faithful! With what did you recognize your Lord?" He replied,
"Through abolishment of decision and invalidation of ambition. When I had an
ambition, something obstructed my ambition. And when I mad a decision, the Divine
Decree opposed my decision. Hence, I came to know that the Planner was other than
me." He asked, "Then with what did you thank Him?" He (AS) answered, "I looked at a
tribulation, which He took away from me, and with which he afflicted someone else.
Hence, I learned that He had bless me, and so I thanked Him." The man, asked, "Why do
you desire to meet Him?" Imam (AS) replied, "When I saw him choosing the religion of
His angels, Messengers and Prophets (AS), I learned that He had honored me with this,
and did not forget me. Hence, I desire to meet Him."

314

7. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Marwazi al-Muqri said: Abu Amr Muhammad
ibn Jafar al-Muqri said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Musili said in Baghdad that Muhammad
ibn Asim al-Tarifi said: Ayyash ibn Yazid ibn al-Hasanibn Ali al-Kahhal freed salve of Zayd
ibn Ali said: my father related to me that

Musa ibn Jafar (AS) related to me that a group of people said to al-Sadiq (AS), "We
pray but our prayers are not granted." He (AS) responded, "If that is the case, it is
because you pray to One whom you do not truly recognize."

8. Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA) said: my father said: Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim that

G L GO G L _ I G Y G G G H L

.a_

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked, "How did you recognize your Lord?' He (AS)
replied, "Through abolishment of decision and invalidation of ambition. My decision
was abolished, and when I had an ambition it was invalidated."
9. Al-Husayn ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Hisham al-Muaddab (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu
Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: Muhammad ibn Abd alRahman al-Khazzaz al-Kufi said: Sulayman ibn Jafar said: Ali ibn al-Hakam said: Hisham ibn
Salim said

G % G C H > A

G%G G G%G mG G G G " G

G G O d G " H L

G G H G Z G 3 Z Z G Z G ~ G H G!" G I H G

I G Y E G G G Z G E Y G G Z G O G G H G G H G
E U

G H G H Z 2 E G GE O E E E* G G 2 G G C
G I G" G G G G G Z G G IG G I G G G 3 G I
315

G 2 %

Z G I H L G I _ E >

.
*
G 2 3 G Y G7 H IG 3I G G G I Z G H Z _ I

I was in the presence of Muhammad ibn al-Muman al-Ahwal, when a man stood up
before him, and asked him, "How did you recognize your Lord?" He replied, "By means
of His Direction, His Instruction, His Introduction, and His Guidance."
He says: I left his presence, and met with Hisham ibn al-Hakam, so I asked him, "What
should I say to someone who asks me: how did you recognize your Lord?"
Hisham relied, "If someone asked me: what did you recognize your Lord with? I would
say: I recognized Allah, High be His Glory, though my own body as that is the thing
which is the closest to me. Verily, my body is composed of assembled parts and
formed of components which were created, the subject of intelligent design, and
engineering. My body increases after decrease, and is reduced after enlargement. My
body has different senses, like sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch, as well as
different limbs. My body was created in weakness, deficiency and contempt. None of
the sense can perceive the function of the other, nor do they have strength over others.
They are incapable of attracting benefits to themselves and preventing harm to
themselves. Wisdom dictates that it is impossible for something to be compiled without
a compiler, and that it is impossible for an image to be made without an artist. Thus, I
learned that my body has a Creator, and that my image was made by an Artist, Who is
contrary to them from all dimensions. Allah, the Mighty and High, has said: And in your
own souls (too); will you not then see.
10. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Jafar Abu
al-Husayn al-Asadi said: al-Husayn ibn al-Mamun al-Qarashi said, on the authority of Umr
ibn Abd al-Aziz, on the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that

H o
L d ~G(R) G2G G! G d Z d G! H G " C G ~ m
E G G! : G G G G

G%G 3 Z G G H I G G~ G 3 L E G 2 E G G~ G G Z I

C G 7 G! d3 % % L d G G2 I G qGC ~G"

H G " G I G G " G 3 OG Y > Z G Y H

H G " G G G I L G (R) G I I
IG G G L G Z L I L G (R) Z L I Z
C Z G Y G! H G H L 2 Z G
H HG(R) Z L G "

Abu Shakir al-Daysani said to me: "Verily, I have a query; I want you to take permission
for me from your companion. For I have certainly asked about it from many scholars.
316

They have not been able to answer me with a satisfactory answer." So I said: "Would
you like to tell me the query. Perhaps I have an answer that would please you."
He replied, "I would certainly like to meet Abu Abd Allah (AS) with this query." So I
obtained the permission for him and he entered his presence and asked him (AS), "Do
you permit me to ask a question?" The Imam (AS) replied, "Ask what has come to you."
He asked, "How can you prove that you have a Creator?" Consequently, he (AS)
responded, I found myself not free from one of two possibilities: either I have crated
myself, or someone else has created me. If I have created myself, then I am not free
from one of the two meanings: either I created myself while I was already existent, or I
created myself while I was on nonexistent. Hence, if I created myself, and I already
exited, then I was self-sufficient of giving existence to myself. And if I was nonexistent,
then you know that the nonexistent cannot bring about a thing. Therefore, the third
meaning is proved that I have a Creator and that is Allah, the Lord of the Universe.
Al-Daysani got up and did not negate the answer.
The Compiler of this book says: The correct statement in this chapter is to say: we have
recognized Allah through Allah, because if we recognized Him through our intellects then He,
the Mighty and High, is the Bestower of our intellects. And if we recognized Him, the Mighty
and High, through His Prophets, Messengers and Proofs (AS) then He, the Mighty and High,
is the One that delegates them, sends them, and the One who has taken them as His Proofs.
If we have recognized Him though ourselves then He, the Mighty and High, is the One who
brought us about. Thus, through Him we have recognized Him.
Al-Sadiq (AS) has saif Allah did not exist then we (Imams) would not have been known,
and if we were not there, then Allah would not be recognized." The meaning of that is that if
the Proofs did not exist, then Allah would not be recognized the way He deserves to be
recognized, and if Allah did not exist, then the Proofs would not have been known.
I have heard some theologians say: "Even if a person were born in a desert on earth and even
if he found nobody to guide him until he becomes big, contemplating the heaves and the earth
would be sufficient to guide him to the fact that there is One Creator who brought them about."
I would respond: Verily, this is something that has not happened, and it relates the news of
something that has not happened. If it has happened, how could it be? If such a thing ever
took place, then that man must have been a Proof of Allah, may His Remembrance of Himself
be Exalted, or a Prophet (AS). Allah sent different type of Prophets. Some were individual
Prophets, who were individually guided. Some were sent to their families, and children. Some
were sent to the people in their region. Some were sent to the people in their city. And some
were sent to all of humanity.
As for the reasoning of Ibrahim (AS), the Friend of Allah, when he looked at Venus, the Moon,
and the Sun, when they set he said: O people! Verily, I am free from the partners you
ascribe to Allah. He (AS) was a Prophet who had inspiration, was delegate and sent by Allah.
All of his words were through the inspiration of Allah, the Mighty and High. As we see in the
Word of the Mighty and High: This is Our argument which We gave to Abraham rebutting
his people.
People are not all like Ibrahim (AS). If it were sufficient to simply think about Allah without the
guidance and Direction of Allah, the Mighty and High, then why did Allah, the Mighty and High,
reveal what He revealed of His Word: So know that there is no god but Allah, and His
Word: Say: He Allah is One, and His Word: Wonderful Originator of heavens and the
earth! How could He have a son when He has no consort and He is the Knower of
subtleties, the Aware. Also the last verse of the chapter "The Banishment," and other verses
about Divine Unity.

317

Chapter Forty -Two: Ithbat Huduth al-Alam. The Assertion of the
Emergence of the Universe - 7 traditions

>2"
1. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah have mercy o him) said:
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on
the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said that Ali ibn Mansur related to me that I heard Hisham ibn
al-Hakam that

G G H G C HG" % G G 2 G G ~ m

3 G2 o

G *
G 2 >

G G%G I E G G G 2 G G dG
4 I
G G A
G H G G G 3 H G O 2 G O

2 Y H L G L d L > d > G

G7 _ _ dG G dG #
G G G G G G G G dG
G G Z 3 G I H > o

G G 2 Z mG" >

. E 2 G G G C m

Abu Shakir al-Daysani entered the presence of Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) and said to
him, Verily, you are one of the shining stars, while your forefathers (AS) were brilliant
full-moons, and your foremothers were the wisest of women. Your origin is the most
honorable origins. When the learned are mentioned then you are at the top of the list.
Inform me, O Ocean (of Knowledge)! How can one prove the emergence of the
universe?" Abu Abd Allah (AS) answered, "Through reason and by comparing it to the
things which are closest to us." He asked, "What would that be?" The reporter says:
Abu Abd Allah (AS) asked for an egg and placed it on his palm and said: "This is a
container. Inside its shell are the albumin, and the egg-yolk. With time, colorful peacock
feathers will burst out of it. Has anything entered it?" He replied, "No." The Imam (AS)
said: "Then this is a proof of the emergence of the universe." He responded, "Your
answer is both nice an concise. I now understand that we cannot accept anything
unless we see it with our eyes, here it with our ears, smell it with our noses, taste it with
our tongues, touch it with our hands, or feel it in our hearts with certainty." Abu Abd
Allah (AS) said: "You have mentioned the five senses. However, they are not useful
without proof, in the same way that darkness cannot be prevented but by light."
318

2. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamdani (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of al-Abbas ibn Amr al-Fuqaymi, on the authority of
Hisham ibn al-Hakam ibn al-Hakam saying that

L G G % G G H G G H G G G G

Z L G H % E G L E
. #

Ibn Abu al-Awja' entered the presence of al-Sadiq (AS) so al-Sadiq asked him, "O son
of Abu al-Awja'! Are you created or not?" He replied, "No, I am not created." Al-Sadiq
(AS) said to him, "So, if you were created, then how would you be?" The reporter says:
Ibn Au al-Awja' could not provide an answer. Therefore, he stood up and left.
3. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya la-Attar said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ibrahim in
Hashim said on the authority of Ali ibn Mabad, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Khalid that

H G G % G% % H _

. G H Y _ 3 H L G L H 3 L G G

A man entered the presence (of Imam Abu al-Hasan Ali al-Rida) and said: "O son of the
Messenger of Allah (SA)! What is the proof that the universe emerged?" He (AS)
replied, "You did not exist, and yet you came into being. You already know that you
have not created yourself, and that you have not been created by someone like you."
4. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Hammad, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abd alRahman, on the authority of Yunus ibn Yaqub that Ali ibn Mansur reported to me that

a

G G G 2 G % 2 *

_ G G 2 G H G!" G
_ k
G % G I G % G m

2 aG }
% G A
G G 2 % G G 2 G G

H G G 2 % L G H

H G% G " 2 G G G~G
3 L G G G 2 L

319

G " G G2 % G ! H2 G% C 3 G

_ 3 G G 2

C ~ H G " G I 3 G G I 3 L Y Z Z 3
H G G 2 4 I 3

G 2 3 Z 2 I > G G L 3 d IG G

G L 3 G 3 G G 2 3 G

_ G m

_ H H G G E G7 L d G
H I C G G 2 H G

G G G G G G G H m H m G

H G G G G 2 G I G 2 m G G I H H

H G " G G G G G 2 G G m G (R) I H G "

H G H G IG G!" *

H G m

2 3 G H *
G G G G 2 H L G

H *

H GL $ G H GL $ G " G L G % G
G G GIG G G2 G 3 G 3 G G G G2 G $ G H G
I G G O H %3 I L G *
G % H % _ G " G

. G G 2
320

Hisham ibn al-Hakam reported to me that An atheist in Egypt was informed of some
knowledge from Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) so he left for Medina to debate with him.
However, he did not find him. It was said to him: "He is in Mecca." So the atheist left for
Mecca. While we were with Abu Abd Allah (AS), the atheist came close to us while we
were circumambulating [tawaf] the Kabah. The atheist bumped shoulders with Abu
Abd Allah (AS), so the Imam (AS) asked him "What is your name?"
He replied, "My name is Abd al-Malik."
The Imam (AS) said: "Then what is your agnomen [kunya]?"
He answered, "Abu Abd Allah."
The Imam (AS) asked,
"Who is the Sovereign (al-Malik) whom you serve? Is He the Sovereign of the Heavens,
or is he one of the sovereigns of the earth? And tell me about your son. Is the servant
[abd] of the God of Heaven, or a god of the earth?"
The atheist kept quiet.
So Abu Abd Allah (AS) continued, "Say whatever you wish to, you will be defeated."
Hisham ibn al-Hakam says: Isaid to the atheist: "Will you not refute him?" Thus, he
disliked what I said.
Therefore, Abu Abd Allah (AS) said to him, "Once I complete the circumambulation,
come and see me."
Once Abu Abd Allah (AS) finished, the atheist came to him and sat down in front of
him, while we had gathered before him. Thus, he (AS) addressed the atheist, "Do you
know that the earth has a top and a bottom?"
He replied, "I do not know, but I certainly think there is nothing below it."
Abu Abd Allah (AS) said: "Thinking [zann] is incapability unless you achieve certainty.
Have you ascended to the heavens?"
He answered, "No."
The Imam (AS) asked, Then do you know what is in it?"
He replied, "I do not."
The Imam (AS) said: "Then have you been to the east and the west and seen what is
behind them?"
He replied, "No."
The Imam (AS) responded,
How strange! You have not been to the east or the west. You have not descended below
the earth. You have not ascended to heaven. You do not have any knowledge of what
surrounds them. However, you re in denial of what is in them. Does a wise man deny
what he knows not?
The atheist said: "No one but you has eve said such a thing to me."
Abu Abd Allah (AS) said: "You are in doubt as to whether He exist or not."
The atheist replied, "That might be it."
Abu Abd Allah said:
O man! There is no authority for the one who knows over the one who knows not.
Likewise, there is no authority for the ignorant over the learned. O my Egyptian brother!
Understand this from me! We never doubt in Allah. Do you not see the sun and the
moon, and the night and day? They have recourse, but they do not make mistakes.
They come and they go. They are both compelled. There is not place for them except
their own place. If they both had the power to leave, and not come back, then why do
they come back? If they both are not compelled, then why does the night change into
the day, and the day into night? By Allah, O Egyptian brother, they are both compelled
to continue their routine. Surely, their Compeller is Wiser and Greater than they are!
The atheist said: "You are right."
Abu Abd Allah (AS) then said:
321

O Egyptian brother! They way you atheists reason is wrong. Time does not bring
anything into existence. If the passage of time can take then away, then why does it not
return them? And if the passage of time can return them, when why does it not take
them away? They are compelled, O Egyptian brother! The sky has been raised, and the
earth has been set down. Why is it that the sky does not collide with the earth? And
why is it that the earth does not collide with the sky? Why is it that the earth does not
go out of its orbit? Who holds them together and who holds together what is between
them?
The atheist said: "By Allah! Their Lord and their Master holds them together!"
Thus, the atheist came to believe through his contact with Abu Abd Allah (AS). Humran
ibn Ayun said to him (AS). "May I be your ransom! Atheist become believers through
you, just like the unbelievers use to become believer through your father (AS)."
The believer, who had believed thanks to Abu Abd Allah (AS), said: "Make me of your
students."
Abu Abd Allah (AS) said to Hisham ibn al-Hakam, "Take him with you and teach him."
Thus, Hisham taught him, and then he became the teacher of the Egyptians, and the
people of the northern region (Syria, Jordan, Palestine and Lebanon). He was trained
spiritually and academically until Abu Abd Allah (AS) was pleased with it.
5. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah have mercy on
them) both said: Ahmad ibn Idris and Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar both said, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn al-Husayn, on the authority of Ali ibn Yaqub al-Hashimi, on the authority of
Marwan ibn Muslim that

H 3 G G 2 G G G
I G H d H G % 2 H G G G7 G 3

G U G I G o
G % G m G G G G 2

Ibn Abu al-Awja' entered the presence of Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) and said: "Do
you not claim that Allah is the Creator of Everything?" Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied,
"Most certainly." He saialso create." The Imam (AS) asked him, "How do you
create?" He responded, "I relieve my bowels in a place, then I stay away from it, and it
makes insects. Therefore, this is my creation." Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied, "Is not the
creator of something aware of what he has created?" He answered, "Why not?"
The Imam (AS) said: "So, can you distinguish the male from the female, and the young
from the old, among those insects?" The reporter says: Ibn Abu al-Awja' kept silent.
6. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub alKulayni through his source of transmission, said

G 2 G L G G~H G G G 2 % H G G G H
q G G2 G G > G%G H G L G Hd G
322

n
G G G % G GG 3 G G ~ I
G 3

G 3 G_ > a
> ~G(R) G~ G G Z I Z G "
% G% 2 E G G G G G G 3 G C 2

G G % E G G G n
G m G% L E 2 G Z G Z G G n
G 2 G 2 3 L

G H G L G (R) G % G%G G G C G {

G 2 % G G G G H G G Y G7 G 3 G Z Y
L G 2 G G 2 % I G G Gd m 2 I G d m E d

G 2 H G d H G G d H

G 2 H > #

G !

_ G x 3

G G G H G Z G G7 H G

G G 2
GGH G G 7 % G G%G G G G!"

G n
H L G H G G 2 %

! G G
G G G7 % G H G " H G " Z G2 Z G Z

G%G G G G 2 G H H G
G n
G 2 E G E 4 G7G G G G G G7 % * !

G G H H G" G GIG H G

323

G 2G G G HG" G G G H 4

G%G G G!" % G 4 H %H G G7
G G L H G " Y G 3 H > H

G 2

H *
G 2 G G 2 H G G G G!" G G

G 2 G _ L G G G G O G

G G " > G G " G G G G Y G G7 G

G 2 2 d L Y Y
. % G >

When Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) had a word with Ibn Abu al-Awja', he returned to
Abu
Abd Allah (AS) the next day and sat down speechless. Therefore, Abu Abd Allah (AS)
sait seems as if you have returned to discuss some of the things we discussed
before."
He replied, "That is what I intend, O son of the Messenger of Allah!"
Abu Abd Allah (AS) saiow astonishing is this? You reject Allah, but you bear
witness that I am the son of the Messenger of Allah."
He responded, "It is a custom and a formality."
The Learned [al-alim] (AS) said to him, "Then what prevents you from speaking?"
He replied, "My reverence for you. Even my tongue venerates you, preventing it from
verbalizing anything. Verily, I have consulted with scholars and debated with
theologians, but never has such a sense of awe entered me as when I am in your
presence."
The Imam (AS) said: "That may be the case. However, I will start with a question."
He approached him, and asked: "Are you created or uncreated?"
Abd al-Karim ibn Abu al-Awja' answered, "I am not created."
So the Learned (AS) asked him, "If you are uncreated, then describe to me how you
would be, had you been created?"
Abd al-Karim was baffled and unable to answer for a long time, focusing his eyes on
the piece of wood that was before him. He was saying "Long, wide, deep, short,
moving, motionless, all of these are descriptions of its creation."
The Learned (AS) said to him, "If you do not know the description of its formation, then
create yourself on the basis of yourself."
Abd al-Karim replied to him, "You have posed a question that nobody has ever posed
to me before, and which nobody will ever ask me after you."
324

Abd Abd Allah (AS) responded to him,
You admit that this question has never been asked of you in the past. However, how
can you know that this question will never be posed to you in the future? O Abd alKarim! You have negated yourself, because you claimed that all things are the same in
the beginning. How, then can you precede or delay things in time?
He (AS) then continued,
O Abd al-Karim! I will further clarify matters for you. If you had a bag which contained
jewels, and someone asked you "Is there a gold-coin [dinar] in the bag?" you would
deny that there is a gold-coin in bag. If the questioner then asked you "Describe for me
the gold-coin," when you did not know how to describe it, would it be right for you to
deny its existence simply because you cannot describe it?"
He replied, "No."
Abu Abd Allah (AS) then responded to him, "The universe, however, is far greater,
longer, and wider than the bag. Likewise, it is possible that there is something in the
universe that was created but which you cannot describe from the uncreated."
Abd al-Karim withdrew, but some of his friends surrendered to reason and embraced
Islam while other remained obstinate in their unbelief as he did.
He returned on the third day and said: May I redirect the question?"
Abu Abd Allah (AS) said to him, "Ask whatever you may wish."
So he asked, "What is the proof for the emergence of bodies?"
Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied,
Verily, in contemplating all things, big, and small, I found that they all increase or
decrease from their original state. If they were eternal, however, then they would
decline or increase from their original state. This is because anything which can decline
or change can be located and can disappear. Anything that exists after nonexistence
has emerged. And anything that exists did not exist at one point. Eternity (sempiternity)
and nonexistence cannot co-exist in the same thing.
Abd al-Karim said: "On the basis of your reasoning, nothing that changes can be
eternal, and must have emerged. So, if something always remains small, how can it be
said to have emerged?"
The Learned (AS) answered,
Verily, we are talking about this universe. Were it to be taken away and replaced with
another one, nothing would be left of the first one. That is sufficient proof that it has
been taken away and replaced by another one. However, I shall answer you on the
basis of your assumption.
We say: Even if something remains small, that small thing could join with another small
thing, and thus become bigger. And since it is subject to such change, it cannot be
eternal. Consequently, anything that is subject to change has emerged. There is
nothing beyond that for you, O Abd al-Karim."
So he withdrew, full of shame and disgrace.
When the next year approached, the Imam (AS) met him in the Sacred Mosque in
Mecca. So some of his followers [shiah] said to him: "Ibn Abu al-Awja' has become a
Muslim." The Learned (AS) replied, "He is blinded from faith. He will not submit."
When he saw the Learned, he said: "My Master, my Guardian."
The Learned (AS) asked him, "What brings you to this place?"
He answered, "It is a custom. It is the practice of the town. And we want to watch all
these crazy people shave their heads and throw pebbles at Satan."
Hence, the Learned (AS) said: "You remain firm in your arrogance and misguidance, O
Abd al-Karm."
When he started to talk, the Learned (AS) said to him, "There is no quarrel in the
pilgrimage." Then the Imam (AS) shook off his cloak from his hand and saif things
are as you say, and they most certainly are not, then we are both saved. However, if
325

things are the way we ay, and they most certainly are, then we are saved and you are
destroyed."
Abd al-Karim drew closer to the ones that were with him, and said: "My heart is filled
with rancour. Take me away from here." Therefore, they took him out, and he died, may
Allah deprive him of mercy!
The Compiler of this book says: Among the proof that bodies emerged is that bodies
are subject to increase and decrease. They are subject to growth and development
which makes them into different forms and shapes. Evidently, we already know that we
have not formed our bodies, nor anyone from our species has formed them. It is not
rational to believe that bodies, which are subject to change, growth, development, and
measure, and which are not eternal, can come about without a Planner.
If it is possible for the universe and all it contains to be without a Producer or a Creator,
then it would also be possible for smaller things. If this were the case, then we should
be able to find texts without authors, buildings without builders, and paintings without
painters. However, it is not possible to find a boat that was not expertly designed by a
builder. If all of this is impossible, then so is the argument that something can exist
without a Creator. Everything we have mentioned, and which we have not mentioned, is
subject to change: the skies, time, the sun and the moon, their rising and their setting,
the seasons, trees and their fruits; the denial of which is the most obstinate
stubbornness. This is clear. All praise be to Allah!
I have asked one of the learned monotheists regarding proof that bodies emerged. He
said: The proof that bodies emerged is that their existence is not separate from His
Existence. The bodies do not have individual existence. They exist along with others.
Whenever a body exists along with others, it cannot be unique, and can only have been
created. Therefore, the body is created as it cannot be separate from the Creator nor
precede it.
And among the proofs that Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is not a body is that there is
not a body that does not have a body that resembles it, which is physically present or
at least imaginable. Whatever has a similarity of any kind is created and has emerged.
Therefore, since Allah, the Mighty and High, is Eternal, it proves that He is devoid of a
body. One more thing: if someone speaks of a "body" literally, it subject to increase
since it applies to something which can be measured in terms of length and width, and
something which is composed of parts.
If someone says: Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, possesses a body, this statement
could only be true if one proves that the aforementioned descriptions could apply to
Him. If what we have mentioned before can apply to Him, then it could only mean two
things: one, that He is created, and that he emerged like all bodies; or two, that all
bodies are eternal. However, if the word "body" does not convey this meaning, and is
only the name of a word, then it is a convention. Thus, it would be like someone calling
Allah, the Mighty and High, a human, composed of flesh and blood, metaphorically, and
not literally. However, the Names of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, should only be
drawn from the names which He Himself has used, or which have been taught to us by
the Messenger of Allah (SA) or the Rightly Guided Imams (AS).
7. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said: al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Sukkari said: Muhammad ibn
Zakariyya said, on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Uamrah, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad, on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn
Ali, on the authority of his father Ali ibn al-Husayn, on the authority of his father, al-Husayn
(AS) that

326

C G H > H _ E H G G G G H G " GG G

.I G I m I I I Gm I H G I C I I I I 3 I G I 3

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) said:
Verily, the body has six states: health, illness, death, life, sleep and wakefulness.
Similar is the spirit: its life is its knowledge, its death is its ignorance, its illness is its
doubt, its health is its certainty, it sleep is its negligence, and its wakefulness is its
preservation (against evil).
The Compiler of this book says: And amongst the proofs of the bodies having emerged is that
the bodies are not free from co-existence or separation, or from being in motion or being still.
Co-existence, separation, motion and stillness have all emerged. Therefore, we have learnt
that the body has emerged due to the emergence of what does not separate from it, not
precedes it.
If someone says: Why did you say: Co-existence and separation are two independent
connotations and likewise motion and stillness, so that you may claim that the body is not free
from them?
It would be replied to him: The proof of that is we find the body co-existing after being
separated, while it is possible for it to remain separated. If it was not so that it had emerged,
then it would not be more worthy for it to co-exist than to remain separated on what it was,
because it dos not emerge itself in this time, so it may have emerged itself on what has coexisted. Neither has it annulled it this time so that it may exist due to its annulment. It is not
possible for what has co-existed to take its meaning due to annulment. Do you not see that if it
was so that it would not co-exist but due to annulment of a meaning or it would not separated
but due to annulment of a meaning, then it would necessitate for it to co-exist and separate
within one state due to the annulment of both meanings? Also, if everything was free form
containing the meaning of co-existence and separated, then it would necessitate for the
accidents to e co-existent and separated, because they are free of these (four) meanings. Its
annulment has been explained and the proof of its annulment is that it co-exists due to
emergence of a meaning and separated due to emergence of a meaning. Similar is the case
for the motion and stillness and all other accidents.
If someone says: if you said: The co-existent becomes co-existent due to the being of the coexistence and becomes separated due to the separation. Thus, why have you rejected it
becoming co-existent or separated due to both of their existence in it? Similarly, you
necessitate this statement: The co-existent becomes co-existent due to the negation of
separation and the separated becomes separated due to the negation of co-existence.
It would be replied to him: Indeed the co-existence and separation are opposites. Opposites
do not appear in one existence at the same time. However, this ruling does not apply in the
negation, because the negation of two opposites cannot be rejected in an existence at the
same time unlike their subsistence. This is why we have said that if a body co-exists due to
negation of separation and is separated due to negation of co-existence; it would necessitate
for them to become co-existent and separated due to the negation of separation and is
separated due to the negation of co-existence; it would necessitate for them to become coexistent and separated due to the negation of both of them. Is it not so that both black and
white colors are negated from a red color, while both are opposites? However, it is not
possible for both of them to be present and co-exist at one time. Thus, it is proved that
negation of opposites cannot be rejected in one state like the way their affirmation can be
327

rejected. Also, the one saying this has proved the co-existence, separation, motion and
stillness and has necessitated that body cannot be free from them, because if it was free from
them it would necessitate for it to co-exist, be separated, be in motion and be still. For if it was
free from them it will not be attributed with this ruling. If the matter is such, and the body is not
fee from these changes then it necessitates it being emerged. What also indicates this is that
the human being is ordered on co-existence, separation, motion and stillness and it carries
them out, and is praised for it, thanked for it and condemned over it if it was evil. We now
know that it is not possible to command the body to do or not to do, nor to praise it for that
action or denounce it. Therefore, it is necessary for who can be commanded to do or not to do
and deserves praise or criticism for that action to be other than the one who cannot be
commanded to do or not to do and not deserve praise or criticism for it. The requirement of
this is the affirmation of the accidents.
If he said: Why do you accept: The body is not free form co-existence, separation, motion and
stillness. And why do you reject that it has never been free of them? Thus, this does not
indicate upon the emergence of a body.
It would be replied to him: If it has ever been possible for it to be free from co-existence,
separation, motion and stillness then it would be possible now and we should witness it.
Therefore, when it is not possible to find bodies without co-existence or separation, then we
come to know that they have never been free of them in the past.
If he says: Why do you reject that if the bodies could not be free of these in the past then it is
not possible for the bodies to be free of them in present?
It would be said to him: Time and space do not have an effect in this matter. Is it not so that if
someone says: I was free from this in the first year r for twenty years and it has become
possible for me after this period? Or it is possible for me in Syria but not in Iraq or it is possible
in Iraq but not in Hejaz; he would be perplexed and ignorant to the wise and whoever
endorses him would also be ignorant. Therefore, we know that time and space do not affect in
this. If there is no rule and effect in this matter, then it is necessary that the rule of body
applies to it in what has passed and in what will come in the future has the ruling of the
present. When it is not possible for the body to be free in present form co-existence or
separation, and motion or stillness, we lean that it can never be free from these ever. If it could
be free form these in the past, then it cannot be rejected that it can remain as that in the
present. So if someone informs us about an unknown town that bodies there were neither coexistent nor separated, neither in motion nor still, then we would doubt in that and not believe
that to be true. The annulment of that proof is the annulment of this statement. Moreover,
whoever proves that bodies are neither co-existent nor separated, most definitely proves them
to be neither close together to one another nor far apart from each other. This attribution
cannot be rational, because there should be either partition and distance between two bodies,
or there should not be any partition and distance between them; there is not third way. If there
is partition and distance between them, they would be separated. However, if there is no
partition and distance between them, it would be necessary fro them to be co-existent,
because this is the limit of the co-existence and separation. If it is so then whoever proves that
bodies are neither co-existent nor separated, is proving them with an attribute that is not
rational. And whosoever goes out of the boundary of rationality is a void-doer.
So if he says: Why do you accept that: The accidents are emerged and reject that they are not
eternal and are always connected to bodies?
I would be replied to him: Because we find the co-existent when separated, the co-existence is
annulled from it and separation emerge to it. Similar is the separated when made t co-exist,
the separation is annulled from it and the co-existence emerges to it. The eternal is eternal
due to itself. It is not possible for it to emerge and be annulled. Therefore, it is proved that the
co-existence and separation are both emerged and like is the case for all accidents. Is it not so
that they are annulled by their contraries then emerge after that. Whatever has the possibility
of emergence and annulment cannot be but emerged. Further more, the eternal being which
328

continues have no need in its essence to a creator, clarifying that it is worthier of being
existent than nonexistent, because if it is not so then he would too exist but through a creator.
If it is so then we know that the eternal cannot be annulled, if it is worthier of being existent
than nonexistent. And that whatever can be annulled, cannot be eternal.
If he says: Why do you say that whatever does not have precedence over the emerged, it is
necessary for it to be emerged?
It would be replied to him: Because the emerged is that which comes about after not being
there and the eternal is the existent that has always been there. The existent that ahs always
been there is necessarily the preceding over the one that came about after not being there.
Whatever has not proceeded is the emerged. Therefore, its share of the essence is the share
of the emerged, because it does not have the precedence but of the emerged. If it is so then
the emerged does not have the share of the eternal in the essence and precedence. Rather it
would be of the emerged. In addition whatever shares in its cause or is equal in its essence
and does not have precedence over it then it is necessary for it to be emerged.
If he says: Is it not so that he body is free form accidents and it is not necessary for it to be an
accident then why do you reject that it is not free from changes and that it is not necessary for
it to have emerged?
It would be replied to him: We have attributed the accident [arad] that it is not of the attributes
of precedence and subsequence. It is indeed informing about genuses of the accidents. If the
body does not precede it then it is not necessary that it may become from their genus. This is
why it is not necessary for the body to be an accident, even if it does not precede over
accidents, if it does not share the accidents in what makes them accidents. We attributed the
eternal that it is informing about its precedence and its essence not having any prior to it. And
we attributed the emerged that it is informing about its being connected with a finish and an
end, and a beginning and start. If it is so, then whatever has no bodies preceding over it, it is
necessary for it to remain to a finish and an end, because it is no possible for an existence that
is not present from the beginning to have precedence over another existence that is present
from the beginning. If this is true, then the emerged shares in what it has emerged and that is
its existence to an end. This is why it necessitates to be emerged for its existence to a finish
and an end. Similar is the answer to all what one may ask in this matter from this issue.
If someone says: if it is proven that the body has emerged then what is the proof that it has
One who has emerged it?
It would be said to him: Because we find changes in their entirety are connected to the
emerged.
If he says: Why do you say that the emerged are connected to the emerged for what it is?
It would be replied: Because if they were not emerged, they would not be in need of a creator.
Is it not so that they were non-emerged existents or were nonexistent, it would not be possible
that they may be connected to the emerged. If it is so then it is proven that they are connected
to the emerged for what the emerged is. Therefore, it is necessary for every emerged being to
have their ruling that every emerged being requires a creator or one that emerges them.
These are proofs of the supporters of the Unity (of God), which are in accordance with the
Book and the authentic traditions of the Prophet (SA) and the Imam (AS).

329

Chapter Forty-Three: Hadith Dhilib The Tradition of Dhilib. - 2
traditions

1. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan and Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq
(may Allah have mercy on them both) said: Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakariyya al-Qittan said:
Muhammad ibn al-Abbas said: Muhammad ibn Abu al-Suri related to me that Ahmad ibn abd
Allah ibn Yunus said, on the authority Sad al-Kinani, on the authority of al-Asbagh ibn
Nubatah that

G G G Z _ G G G!" #
H % m G G G7 G H : 3 2 G G 2 G

Z _ G G Y Z _ G G Z G G G

G H H G%G I G%G G H2 H Z _ G% G

G G H G (R) G~ Z Z G GH G G

H G IG 3 G G H L I L G G ! L G G

H G R)G G GG L H G 7 G G H G 3

3 I H G 7 G G $

G G G G!" G O G
G G G7 $ G%G m G
G 3 G

G H G G~ G 2 G~ H G
G C G L G 2 m G G G I

G I_ G I_ _ L G E I G7 L G E G7 E $ E $ G~ d H 2H

% m 3 I G G 3 I G G d3 I G IG I G IG I G G I_ A

Z 2 Z G EqG G 3 G Z G G _ G

G H G q G G H L GG G HG" G d G7 % H _

Z 2
% 3 G G G G 3 % G %
330

E G G G G G G G

H G " q G G G G GG O G

E H G G E 2G G G G H _ G

% 4 m E 4 _ E 2 G I G G E G G G7 G
E G E 4 G E I G G GE E 4 G7 E G G7 G % m E 4 _

2 G~ H I G G G!" > G G G GG L G G3 H G% Z G q G G k

H Z G I G" Z G G I G G I G" 2

G%G G!" % G%G 2 H I 2 3

G G!" G%G G E > n

GO^ G I H G Y I_ #

H G I d H G " L 2 3 H G k

G I C L H _ $ G G
G%G G G%G3 G%G3 G G%G H

G I G G G G G G7 G
G G GG L G G I G Z C

Z _ G G O G G~ G 2 G~ H Z I G G G!" > G
G G ~H % G G " E G % G H

E G G G%G G G E G GE E G G E G
C GL G H I H % GH

G G G G m C G G % G G G (R) E G E G G G
2

G O
G G m G 2C

H I C H I G E G G G G G H H

G O

331

m G H H d G q G

G H H % 3 I G E 4 3
G G!2 q G H H IG G G G m G % Y I E
Z I G G (R) G%G2 G H
q G!" G H G G7 G G GG G % E

G " % G H % G!" H E G G%
Ge H G G G H 2 G

G m G~ G 2 G~ H A

G G I 3 E G H G G

G E G G G G G G G~ 3 L OG Y

I G G G G m G _ L G
H I C H Z Z _ G H
H G G H G G G!" % H % G q H I G G H G " G
3

Z *
G G I 3 E G H 3 G G

H Z Z G%_ G H G% G G G GG G Z 2 3 ^

I Z G Z G H G " m G _ L G

H 3
G H % 2H G G G!" % H G q I
. I GO G

When Ali (AS) assumed the Caliphate, and the people were paying allegiance to him,
he left for the Mosque wearing the turban, the outer garment [burdah], the shoes, and
the sword of the Messenger of Allah (SA). He (AS) went up the pulpit. He saw down
firmly. He crossed his fingers. He placed his hands cross his stomach. And he (AS)
said:
O assembly of People! Ask me before you are deprived of me. This is the vessel of
knowledge. This is (the effect of) the saliva of the Messenger of Allah (SA). This is what
the Messenger of Allah (SA) fed me like the feeding of a bird. Ask me, for verily, I have
the knowledge of the First Ones and the Last Ones.
332

By Allah, if a cushion were folded up for me, I could sit on it and judge the believers in
the Torah on the basis of the Torah until the Torah would profess: Ali has spoken the
truth, and has not lied. He has judged you according to what Allah revealed through
me.' I could judge the believers in the Bible on the basis of the Bible until the Bible
would profess: Ali has spoken the truth, and has not lied. He has judged you
according to what Allah has revealed through me.' And I could judge the believers in
the Qur'an on the basis of the Qur'an until the Qur'an would profess: Ali has spoken
the truth, and has not lied. He has judged you according to what Allah ha revealed
through me.' All of you read the Qur'an day and night. Does anyone of you know what
is revealed in it? If it were not for a single verse in the Book of Allah, I would have
informed of everything that has happened in the past, everything which is happening in
the present, and everything which will happen in the future up to the Day of Judgment.
That verse is this: Allah makes to pass away and establishes what He pleases, and with
Him is the basis of the Book. He (AS) then continued: Ask me before you are deprived
of me. By Allah who split the grain seed and the made the persons, if you asked me
about each and every verse; whether it was revealed during the day or during the night,
whether it was revealed in Mecca or Medina, or revealed while traveling or not while
traveling, the abrogating verses or the abrogated ones, the decisive verses or the
allegorical ones, and their interpretations and their context, I would inform you.
A man called Dhilib, who was sharp of tongue, eloquent in speaking, and brave at
heart, stood up and said: "The son of Abu Talib has certainly climbed on a difficult
ladder. In questioning him I will surely humiliate him today for all of you." Then he
addressed the Imam (AS) and said: "O Commander of the Faithful, have you seen your
Lord?" The Imam (AS) replied, "Woe to you, O Dhilib! I do not serve a lord that I have
not seen." He saiow did you see him? Describe Him for us." Ali (AS) responded,
Woe to you! The eyes do not see him through means of vision, but the hearts see Him
through certainty of faith. Woe to you, O Dhilib! Verily, my Lord cannot be described in
terms of proximity or movement. He is the Most Subtle of the Subtle and cannot be
described in terms of subtletly. He is the Greatest of the Great whose greatness cannot
be described in terms of greatness. He is the Grandest of the Grand whose grandeur
cannot be expressed in terms of grandeur. He is the Highest of the High whose
highness cannot be described in terms of toughness. He is the Most Affectionate of the
Affectionate whose mercy cannot be described in terms of delicateness. He is the
granter of Security, but not through sevice. He perceives not by touch, nor speaks
though enunciation. He is Present in all Things, but not physically. And he is Absent in
All thins, but not through conflict. He is Above all Things, yet it cannot be said that
something is above Him. He is in Front of All Things, but it cannot be said: He as a
front. He Permeates all Things, but He is neither inside nor outside them.
Dhilib dropped fainting, and when he woke up again, he said: "By Allah, I have never
heard the likeness of this reply, and by Allah I shall never ask such questions again."
The Imam (AS) then continues: "Ask me before you are deprived of me."
So al-Ashath ibn Qays stood before him and asked, "O Commander of the Faithful!
Why are the Zorastrians taxed [jizyah] when no book was revealed to them and no
prophet was sent to them?" The Imam (AS) replied, O Ashath! Allah certainly revealed
a Book for them, and sent them a Messenger. They once had a king, who got drunk one
night, called his daughter to his bed, and committed incest with her.
When he got up in the morning, the people heard of this, gathered at his door and said:
"O king! You have defiled and disgraced our religion and destroyed it. Come out at
once so that we can purify you through the legal punishment [hadd]."
He replied to them: "Gather together, and listen to my speech. If there is a way out for
me from what I have perpetrated, then so be it. Otherwise, do with me as you please."
333

So they gathered and he addressed them: "Do you know that Allah has not created a
creation more honorable to Him than our father Adam and our mother Eve?" They
replied: "You are right, O king." He sais it not so that his sons married his
daughters and his daughters married his sons?" They answered: "You are right. This is
the religion." Based on that they contracted in marriage. Hence Allah took away the
knowledge from their chests, and raised the Book from them. Thus, they are
unbelievers. They shall enter the Hell without any accountability and the hypocrites are
worse off than them. Ashath said: "By Allah, I have never heard the likeness of this
reply, and by Allah I shall never ask such questions again." The Imam (AS) then
continued: "Ask me before you are deprived of me." So a man from further away in the
Mosque stood up, leaning on his stake. He crossed all the people until he was close to
the Imam (AS). Then he said: "O Commander of the Faithful! Teach me something that
will save me from the Fire." Ali (AS) said to him, Listen to me, O man, and understand!
This world is established on three things: on a leaned person who speaks using his
knowledge; on a wealthy person who is not miserly with his wealth towards the
religious; and on a patient poor person. Thus, if the learned hides his knowledge, the
wealthy acts miserly, and the poor do not practice patience, they shall meet the
affliction and ruin. At that point the recognizers of Allah know that he house will return
to its origin, i.e. disbelief after faith. O Questioner, do not be dazzled over large
numbers of mosques and groups of people who are united in their bodies, but
separated in hearts. O questioner! Verily, there are three types of people: the ascetic
[zahid], the hedonist [raghib], and the patient person [sabir]. As for the ascetic, he is
never pleased with anything from this world that comes to him nor is he displeased
over anything that expires from him. As for the patient person, he longs for the world
from his heart, but when he finds anything from it he refrains from it due to knowing its
evil result. As for the hedonistic, he is careless of obtaining the world from permissible
means or forbidden means. This man asked, "O Commander of the Faithful! What is the
sign of a believer in such a time?" He (AS) replied, "He fulfils the obligations that Allah
has imposed upon him and he keeps away from what Allah has forbidden, regardless of
how much he yearns for it." The man asked, "You are right, by Allah, O Commander of
the Faithful." Then the man disappeared, and we did not see him. So the people looked
for him, but did not find him. Ali (AS) smiled, while on the pulpit, and said: "What is the
matter with you? That was my brother, al-Khidr (AS)." The Imam (AS) then continues:
"Ask me before you are deprived of me." No one stood up to him. Hence, he praised
Allah and extolled Him, and sent his blessings on the Prophet (SA). He then said to alHasan (AS), "O Hasan, stand up and go up the pulpit and deliver a speech so that the
Quraysh may not claim ignorance of you after me, otherwise they will say: "Verily, alHasan ibn Ali knows nothing good." Al-Hasan (AS) said: "O father! How can I go upon
the pulpit and speak when you are among the people listening and seeing?"
Ali (ibn Abu Talib) said to him, "May my father and mother be your ransom! I will
conceal myself form you and will listen and see you while your cannot see me."
Al-Hasan (AS) went up the pulpit, praised Allah profusely, and blessed the Prophet (SA)
briefly. He (AS) then said: "O people, I have heard my grandfather the Messenger of
Allah (SA) say: "I am the City of Knowledge and Ali is its Gate. A city can only be
entered by its gate." Then he (AS) came down. Ali (AS) leapt towards him, pulled him,
and embraced him. Then he said to al-Husayn (AS), "O my son! Stand up. Go to the
pulpit and deliver s speech so that the Quraysh cannot claim ignorance of you after me;
otherwise, they will say: "Verily, al-Husayn ibn Ali has no vision. Your speech should
be subsequent to your brother's speech."
Al-Husayn (AS) went up the pulpit, praised Allah profusely, and blessed the Prophet
(SA) briefly. He (AS) then said: "O Assembly! I heard my grandfather, the Messenger of
334

Allah (SA) says: "Verily, Ali is the City of Guidance. Whoever enters it is saved, and
whoever fails to enter it is lost."
Ali (AS) leapt towards him, embraced him, and kissed him. Then he (AS) said: "O
Assembly! Bear witness that these two are sons of the Messenger of Allah (SA) which
he has entrusted to my custody, and I am entrusting them to you. Beware O people, as
the Messenger of Allah (SA) will question you about them."
2. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan related to
me that Abd Allah ibn Dahir said: al-Husayn ibn Yahya al-Kufi related to me that Qutham ibn
Qatadah related to me, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Yunus that

G q G G % m G G G q GG G : G G2 G
L q G G H L GG G qG

G G G 3 q G G %

G H G " q G G G G GG O G

4 m E 4 _ 2 G GG

G H E H G IG G Gc 4 m E 4 _ % 2

G E G G O E G I G

2 G Gd G G I GE O I G E G

_ d3 >
>

_ C 3 >
% 2 G G%G 3 E dG G
2 >

G G GG G % G G %

G G H IG 3 G 3G

G *

o
3 H G 4 _ G H H % G IG _ G I G }_

G GG O G Z G % 2 G E E 2 I G }

G G E I q IG _ G L IG G G
m d Y H ] G" Z G G" Z G d G" Z IG"

335

Z GC 1/2
G m Z

G n
Z G >

G G _ G Z 2 E G q

G O

H G% Z G q G G k
. G G E 4 G!" G I G L G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
When the Commander of the Faithful (AS) was preaching from the pulpit of al-Kufah, a
man stood up to him. His name was Dhilib, who was sharp of tongue, eloquent in
speech, and brave at heart said: "O Commander of the Faithful! Have you seen your

The Imam (AS) replied, "Woe to you! O Dhilib. I do not serve a Lord that I have not
seen."
He said: "O Commander of Faithful, how did you see him?"
Ali (AS) responded,
Woe to you! O Dhilib. Eyes cannot perceive him by means of vision, but hearts see Him
through certainty of faith. Woe to you, O Dhilib! Verily, my Lord is the Most Subtle of
the Subtle, but whose subtetly cannot be described in terms of subtlety. He is the
Greatest of the Great, whose greatness cannot be described in terms of greatness. He
is the Grandest of the Grand, whose grandeur cannot be described in terms of
grandeur. He is the Highest of the High, who cannot be described in terms of
toughness. He preceded everything, so it cannot be said that something preceded Him.
He will remain forever, so it cannot be said that there shall be something after Him. He
is the One that wills all things, but not through resolution. He is the MostAccomplishing, but not through deception. He is Present in all Things, but not
physically or through conflict. He is Manifest, but not in the sense of pursuit. He is
Evident, but not by means of vision. He is Separate, but not by means of distance. He is
Close, but not through attachment. He is Subtle, but not by means of a body. He is
Existent not after nonexistence. He is the One who Accomplishes, but not by means of
compulsion. He is the Appraiser, but not by means of movement. He is the Intender, but
not through resolution.
He is the All-Hearing, but not by means of an auditory organ. He is All-Seeing, but not
by a visual organ. Space does not encompass Him. Time does not escort Him.
336

Attributes do not limit Him. Slumber seizes Him not. His Essence precedes time, and
His Being precedes nonexistence. His beginning its sempiternal.
Through His Formation of gatherings, it is known that He has no gathering. Through
His Creation of substances, it is known that He is not a substance. Through His
Creation of opposites, it is known that He has no opposite. Through His Creation of
companions, it is known that He has no consort. He made Light opposite of darkness,
dryness opposite of moisture, and cold opposite of heat. He is the Composer of these
opposites and the Differentiator between their closeness. This composition is an
indication over the Composer and the differentiation over the Differentiator. That is the
Word of the Mighty and High: And of everything We have created pairs that you may
reflect.
Thus, He has differentiated through this between "before" and "after" so that it
becomes known that He has no before or after. Our instinct tells us instinctively that
the Giver of Instincts has no instinct. Our subjection to time tells us that the Creator of
Time is not subjected to time. The veils that He has placed between some people tell us
that there is no veil between Him and His Creation. He was still a Lord when there was
no one to rule over. He was still a Deity when there was no one to worship Him. And He
was still All-Knowing when there was nothing to be known. And He was still AllHearing, when there was nothing to be heard.
Then Ali (AS) composed this poem:
My Master has always been recognized with praise,
My Master has always been attributed with generosity,
You existed even when there was no light to burn,
And when no darkness clinged to the horizon,
Our Lord differs from everything in creation,
And from whatever the imagination can conceive,
So whoever attempts to describe Him in human terms,
Will return besiege, tying his shoulder with incapability,
In the ways of ascent are seen the waves of His Omnipotence
A wave that exhibits blindly, in blink of an eye, like a spirit,
Therefore, leave the narrow-minded debater in religion,
Who the doubt ha touched, making his vision absurd,
And be in the company of the reliable one, for the love of His Master,
Who is received with honor fro His Guardian,
A proof of guidance entered in the evening spreading in the earth,
And in heaven, He is recognized with the beautiful sate.
The reporter said: Dhilib dropped fainting, and when he woke up again, he saihave
never heard this speech, and I shall never ask such questions again."
The Compiler of this book says: In this tradition are words which al-Rida (AS) has already
mentioned in his sermon. This is a confirmation of our belief that the Imams (AS) inherited the
knowledge of their fathers all the way back to the Prophet (SA).

337

Chapter Forty-Four: Hadith Subakht al-Yahudi The Tradition of
Subakht, the Jewish Man - 2 traditions

1. My father (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa and Ibrahim ibn Hashim both said, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ali,
on the authority of Dawud ibn Ali al-Yaqubi, on the authority of some of our scholars, on the
authority of Abd al-Ala freed slave of Al Sam,

_ d L G H % L 2H % m G I G : G G2 G
E _ G7 C L G H % L H G " 2 3H % d H G G (R)

E G G H 3 H G " G % G G H m G%G G

H G " % G " I H G L G3 L 2H G % H G" E G2 E G

On the authority of Abu Abd Allah (AS) that
A Jewish man called Subakht came to the Messenger of Allah (SA) and said: "O
Muhammad, I have come to ask about your Lord, So, if you answer me about what I ask
you of Him, I will follow you. Otherwise, I will leave." The Messenger of Allah (AS) said
to him, "Ask what you wish." Hence, he asked, "Where is your Lord?" The Prophet (SA)
replied, "He is in very place, but He is not confined in any place." He enquired, "How is
He?" The Prophet answered, "How can I describe my Lord in terms of quality when
quality was created by Allah, and Allah cannot be compared with His Creation."
He asked, "Then who knows that you are a Prophet (SA)?" The reported says:
"Everything which surrounded him, including the stones, pebbles and other things,
spoke in clear Arabic That O Shaykh! Verily, He is the Messenger of Allah.'"
So Subakht said: "By Allah I have not seen things so clearly as I have seen them
today." Then he saibear witness that there is no god but Allah, and that you are the
Messenger of Allah."
2. Abu al-Husayn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Farisi said: Abu Said Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Rumayh al-Nisawi said: Ahmad ibn Jafar al-Aqili related to me in Quhistan
that Ahmad ibn Ali al-Balkhi related to me that Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn Ali al-KhuzaiI
said: Abd Allah ibn Jafar al-Azhari said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Jafar ibn Muhammad, on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn Ali, on the authority of his
father Ali ibn al-Husayn, on the authority of his father Al-Husayn (AS) that

338

L 2H A
G G G%G2 G G C G GG G : G G%G

H G " % G " G I G!" 3 G!" H Z G

G _ G7 H L 2H % 2 Z H H % (c)

C E G!" E G G G O H G m H G" % m
G 3A

G 2 % H G!

2 Z H H H G " % G " I % H G " 2 G
H % 2 Z H H H G " % G " I Z m L %

G G G GI G % GO G % aG G % _G G G
.G 2 H H _ % H G(R) G % G H G %H H G "

The Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) said in some of his sermons:
"Who was present when Subakht the Persian had a word with the Messenger of Allah

The people said: "None of us were present."
So Ali (AS) saiowever, I was with him (AS) when Subakht came to him. He
belonged to Persian royalty, and was very sharp of mind. He asked: O Muhammad! To
what do you call the people?'
The Prophet (SA) replied, "I call people to witness that there is no god but Allah, the
One, the Only, without partners, and that Muhammad is His Servant, and His
Messenger."
So Subakht asked, "Where is Allah, O Muhammad?"
He (SA) answered, "He is present in every place by means of His Signs."
He asked, "How is He?"
The Prophet (SA) replied, "He is not subject to quality nor space, because He, the
Mighty and High, created both quality and space."
Subakht asked, "Then where did He come from?"
He (SA) replied, "It cannot be said of Him that He came' since it refers to something
that moves form one place to another. Our Lord, however, is not subject to space or to
movement. In fact, He has always been without place and He never declines."
Then he said: "O Muhammad! Verily, you are describing your Great Lord without
quality. Then how do I know that He has sent you?"

339

There was nothing that surrounded us that day, of stone, pebble, mountain, tree or
animal, but that it professed: I bear witness that here is no god but Allah, and that
Muhammad is His Servant, and His Messenger.'
Thus, I myself professed that I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, and that
Muhammad is His Servant, and His Messenger.'
So Subakht asked, "O Muhammad! Who is this?"
The Prophet (SA) replied,
This (Ali ibn Abu Talib) is the best of my family, and the closest person to me in all of
creation. His flesh is my flesh. His blood is my blood. His spirit is my spirit. He is my
successor in my lifetime and the Caliph after my death. He is to me as Harun was to
Musa, except that there will be no prophet after me. Listen to him, and obey him, for
verily he embodies the truth.
Then the Prophet (SA) named the Jewish man "Abd Allah."

340

Chapter Forty-Five: Mana Subhan Allah The Meaning of "Glory be to
Allah". - 2 traditions

2
1. Abd ibn Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab al-Sajzi said in Naysabur that Abu al-Hasan
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abd Allah ibn Hamzah al-Sharani al-Ammari from the children of
Ammar ibn Yasir (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Abu Muhammad Ubayd Allah ibn
Yahya ibn Abd al-Baqi, al-Adhani said in Adhanah that ali ibn al-Hasan al-Maani said: Abd
Allah ibn Yazid related to, on the authority of Yahya ibn Uqbah ibn Abu al-Ayzar that
Muhammad ibn Hajjar said, on the authority of Yazid ibn al-Asamm that

EqG G C G G (R)
H LH G " d2 G G "

I G (R) E G C G%G H % I G 3 H H G G G G
2 G G

A man asked Umar ibn al-Khattab, "O Commander of the Faithful! What is the meaning
of Glory be to Allah' [subhan Allah]?"
He replied, "Verily, there is a man within these walls who informs when asked, and
informs when there is silence."
So the man entered and it was Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS); hence, he asked, "O Fater of
Hasan! What is the meaning of Glory be to Allah'?"
He (AS) answered, "It is revering the Glory of Allah, the Mighty and High, and
deanthropomorphising Allah from what the infidels say about Him. Therefore, when a
servant says this, all the angels bless him."
2. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa ibn
Ubayd, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the authority Hisham ibn al-Hakam
that

2 G G2 L d : G G G G

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the expression Glory be to Allah.'
Thus, he (AS) replied, "Pride belongs to Allah, the Mighty and High."

3. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sadabadi said, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi, on the authority of Abd al-Azim ibn Abd
Allah al-Hasani, on the authority of Ali ibn Asbat, on the authority of Sulayman freed slave of
Tirbal, on the authority of Hisham al-Jawaliqi that

341

.% I G 3 G%G G m G
2 H H G G G G2 L d
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS), "What was meant by the words of Allah, the
Mighty, and High: Glory be to Allah?" He (AS) explained, "His deanthropomorphism."

342

Chapter Forty-Six: Mana Allahu Akbar The Meaning of Allah is the
Greatest - 2 traditions

1. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya la-Attar (RA) said: My father said, on the authority of
Sahl ibn Ziyad al-Adami, on the authority of Ibn Mahbub, on the authority of who related to him
that

G 2 E 4 _ G E 4 _ G G : G G2 G
.

A man came to al-Sadiq (AS) and said: "Allah is the Greatest [Allahu Akbar]!"
The Imam (AS) asked him, "What is Allah greater than?"
The man answered, "Greater than everything!"
Al-Sadiq (AS) replied, "You have brought Allah down to the level of a door."
The requested, "What should I say then?"
He (AS) said: "Say Allah is greater than anything that can be described."
2. Muhammad ibn Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar
said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muruk ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Jumay' ibn Amr that

4 H
E 4 _ G L E 4 C G G 2 G!

.

Al-Sadiq (AS) asked me "What is the meaning of Allahu Akbar'?"
I replied, "Allah is greater than everything."
He (AS) saie was there when nothing existed. Then was it possible to say at that
time that Allah is greater than everything?"
I asked, "Then what is its meaning?"
He replied, "Allah is greater than what He can be attributed with."

343

Chapter Forty-Seven: Mana al-Awwal wa-al-Akhir. The Meaning of
the First and the Last - 2 traditions

1. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said, on the authority of
his father, on the authority of Abu Umayr, on the authority of Ibn Udhaynah, on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Hukaym; on the authority of al-Maymun al-Ban that

% 2

G H H H G%G G G G2 L G

G H G G G G G G

.*E 4 _ G E G!" E G H

I heard Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) when he was questioned about the Word of the
Mighty and High: He is the First and the Last. He (AS) said:
He is the First, not in the sense that He was prior to something or that something
preceded Him. He is the Last, not in the sense that He has an end as applicable to a
created being, but in the sense that He has always been, and always will be, the Eternal
First and the Eternal last, without a beginning and without an end. Nothing takes place
in Him, not does He change from one state to another. He is the Creator of All Things.
2. Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA) said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abd al-Jabbar, on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority of
Fudayl ibn Uthman, on the authority of Ibn Abu Yafur that

_ 2 #

G H H H G G G G2 L d

G!" E G E G!" E G
G H G % H G H G " 4 % H G" G

R) G H H G "E G G!" E Y G E Y G!"E G G E G G!" E G G E

G >
G 3 #
G E 4 _ 2 H Z G
Z H G H G H Z G Z 3 Z H Z Z H Z Z H Z H Z 3 G H G Y G

. G
_ G% H 2 Z 3 Z H Z 2 Z H Z 3/4 Z H Z

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: He
is the First and the Last, and said: "We understand the meaning of the First. However,
we need you to explain to us the meaning of the Last."
344

Therefore, he (AS) explained,
Verily, there is nothing that does not perish, go through changes, deteriorate, change
color, change form, change quality, increase or decrease, except the Lord of the
Universe. Verily, He has always been, and will always be Solitary. He is the First that
existed before everything. And He is the Last that will exist forever. The attributes and
adjectives applied to Him are invariable. This is unlike human beings who are subject to
change. At one stage they were dust, at another they were flesh and blood, and finally,
their mortal remains decompose. Human beings are like dates [balah], which are
subject to stages, moving from unripe [busr] to ripe dates [rutab], and from ripe dates
to dried dates [tamr]. When applied to others but Allah, names and adjectives are
subject to change. Allah, the Mighty and High, differs from those.

345

Chapter Forty-Eight:Mana Qawl Allah: Al-Rahman ala al-Arsh
istawa. The Meaning of Allahs Word: the Most Compassionate is
Firm on the Empyrean. - 9 traditions

1. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (may Allah have mercy on him) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya
al-Attar said, on the authority of Sahl ibn al-Adami, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Marid that

H H H G G G G G 2 H
.E 4 G 4
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was questioned about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: The Most Compassionate is firm on the Empyrean, so he (AS) replied, "He is
equal (in distance) to everything. Therefore, He is not closer to one thing than another."
2. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Husayn,
on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj that

G H H H G G G G2 L d
. E 4 _ G q
% G 2 E 4 G 4

m G
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: The
Most Compassionate is firm on the Empyrean, so he (AS) answered, "He is equal with
everything. Nothing is closer to Him than another. What is far is not far from Him, and
what is close is not close to Him. He is equal in distance to everything."
3. Abu al-Husayn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Farisi said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Abu Said al-Nisawi said: Abu Nasr Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abd Allah al-Sughdi said in
Marw that Muhammad ibn Yaqub ibn al-Hakam al-Askari and his brother Muadh ibn Yaqub
both said: Muhammad ibn Sinan al-Hanzali sail said: Abd Allah ibn Asim said: Abd alRahman ibn Qays said, on the authority of Abu Hashim al-Rummani, on the authority of
Zadhan that

% G G G 2 H G E OG G

% d I % d EqG G G _ G GG G G G!" G H I % 2 G G O En
346

H_ G G ~G % % d

G%G E G!" E G E G7

G % H H H G " G

H G " G G E G I _

4 %H G G 3/4

G 3 G O

G I G%G G G O G

. G L C G ~ *

Salman al-Farisi related a long tradition concerning the coming of the Catholicos to
Medina with a hundred Christians after the death of the Messenger of Allah (SA) and
asking Abu Bakr some questions, which he could not reply. Then they were directed to
the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS), so they asked him (those
questions), and he answered them. Among the queries he was asked:
"Inform me about the Lord. Where is He, and where was He?"
Ali (AS) replied,
The Lord, Exalted be His Glory, is not subject to space. He is how He was, and He was
as He is now. He is not in any place, nor has He declined from one place to another. He
is not encompassed in one place; rather, He has always been without boundary and
without quality.
The Catholicos said: "You have spoken the truth. Now tell me about the Lord. Is He in
this world or is He is the Hereafter?"
Ali (AS) replied,
Our Lord existed before this world existed, and He will exist forever. He is the Planner
of this World, and the All-Knowing of the Hereafter. It is not possible for Him to be
encompassed by this world or the Hereafter. However, He knows all that is in this
world, and all that is in the Hereafter.
He said: "You have spoken the truth. May Allah have mercy on you!" He then asked,
"Tell me about our Lord. Does He carry or is He carried?"
Ali (AS), thus, replied, "Verily, our Lord, Exalted be His Glory, carries and is not
carried."
The Christian asked, "How is that? In the Bible we find that The Empyrean of your Lord
is carried about them on the day by eight angels."
Ali (AS) answered,
Verily, the angels carry the Empyrean. However, the empyrean is not shaped like a bed
as you image. Rather, it is something bounder, crated, and planned, which is subjected
347

to the Lord. It is not as if He is on it like something being carried by another. He has
ordered angels to carry it, and they do so with the power that he has granted them.
The Christian said: "You have spoke the truth, May Allah have mercy on you!."
The Compiler of this book says: The Tradition is long. We have extracted from it the required
passage. I have transmitted all of it in the end of the book Al-Nabuwwat.
4. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar
said, on the authority of Sahl ibn Ziyad, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Musa al-Khashshab,
on the authority of some of the ones he transmits from hurrying the transmission, that

H H H G G G % H G G2 G

.E 4 G 4

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was questioned about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: The Most Compassionate is firm on the Empyrean, so he (AS) replied,
"He is equal in distance to everything. Therefore, He is not closer to one thing than
another."
5. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: al-Husayn ibn al-Husayn ibn
Aban said, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of al-Nadr ibn Suwayd, on
the authority of Asim ibn Humayd, on the authority of Abu Basir that

G G! 3/4

4 4 G7 4 G H H

.% 2 E 4 G % E G (R)G % G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Whoever claims that Allah, the Mighty and High, is
from something or in something or on something, then he has certainly disbelieved."
I saixplain that to me." He (AS) responded, "I refer to a person who claims that He
is contained by something, that He is restrained by something, or that He is preceded
by something."
6. And in another tradition it says

E 4 % H Z % E 4 G7 % H Z % E 4 G

"Whoever claims that Allah is from something, he implies that He has been created.
Whoever claims that He is in something, he implies that He is limited. And whoever
claims that He is on something, he implies that He is carried by something."

348

7. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil said: Abd Allah ibn Jafar said, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub that Maqatil ibn Sulayman
related to me that

H H H G G E H }

.E 4 G 4
I asked Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: The
Most Compassionate is firm on the Empyrean, so he (AS) replied, "He is equal in
distance to everything. Therefore, He is not closer to one thing than to another."
8. And with this chain of transmission, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the
authority of Hammid that

.E 4 E 4 G7 E 4 G H H

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Whoever claims that Allah, the Mighty and High, is
from something, in something, or on something, has surely lied."
9. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (may Allah have mercy on him) said, on the authority of his
paternal uncle Muhammad ibn Abu al-Qasim, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah,
on the authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sinan, on the authority of alMufaddal ibn Umar that

E 4 E 4 G7 E 4 G H H
% E 4 % H % H E 4 G7 % H Z % E 4 G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Whoever claims that Allah, the Mighty and High, is from something, in something, or on
something, he has surely committed polytheism. "He (AS) added, "Whoever claims that
Allah is from something, he implies that He is created. Whoever claims that Allah is
from something, he implies that He is created. Whoever claims that He is in something,
he implies that He is limited. And whoever claims that He is on something, He has
implied that He is carried."
The Compiler of this book says: The anthropomorphist cling to the Word of the Mighty and
High: Surely your Lord is Allah, who created heaves and the earth in six days, then
established Himself upon the Empyrean; He throws the veil of night over the day, which
pursues it incessantly. There is no proof in that for them, because He, the Mighty and High,
meant by this: then established Himself upon the Empyrean, i.e. then He transferred the
349

Empyrean above the heavens, while He was in control over it and is its Master. His Word, the
Mighty and High: then' refers to raising the Empyrean to the place where it is and transferring
it to a steady state. Thus, it is not possible for the word [istawa]' to mean taking possession,'
because Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, taking possession over the sovereignty and all things
is not an accidental matter. In fact, He has always been the Master of everything, and in
possession of everything. Verily, He, the Mighty and High, has mentioned to establish' after
using the word then,' and that means to raise' metaphorically. It is similar to His Word: And
most certainly We will try you until We have known those among you who exert
themselves hard, and the patient. He has mentioned We have known' with His word until,'
while He, the Mighty and High, means until the ones who exert exert.' We know this because
until' is only used with an accidental action, while the knowledge of Allah, the Mighty and
High, about the things is not accidental. Similar is the mention of His Word, the Mighty and
High: established Himself upon the Empyrean' after His Word: then.' He means by that
then He raised the Empyrean for His Possession over it. He does not mean by that the
sitting' or proportion of body,' because it is not possible that Allah could be a body or somatic.
Exalted is Allah, the Elevated, and the High, from such things.

350

Chapter Forty-Nine: Mana Qawl Allah: wa kan Arshuhu ala al-Ma'.
The Meaning of Allah's Word: His Empyrean was on the Water - 2
traditions

1. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail alBarmaki that Jadhan ibn Nasr al-Kandi said: Sahl ibn Ziyad al-Adami related to, on the
authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir, on the
authority of Dawud al-Raqqi that

m G! G %
H H G%G G G2 L d

H G " G L G G! _ L % G % G G H

3 2
G I H C L H G O G G G G H

G G7 Gc GG aG G G G G O G H

G I G O GL I G G O G H Y G
G H G I G G H G

GI G G G Z H_ H

HG" m GG H HG" m

G 2 G

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of the Mighty and High: His
Empyrean was on the Water. So he (AS) asked me, "How do they interpret it?"
I answered, "They say that the Empyrean was on the water, and that the Lord was on
it."
Thus, he (AS) responded, "They have lied, Whoever claims that implies that Allah is
carried, and has described Him on the basis of the attributes of the created, necessarily
implying that the thing that carries Him is mightier than He is."
I said: "May I be your ransom! Could you clarify that for me?"
Consequently, he (AS) responded,
Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, burdened the water with His Knowledge and His
Religion, before the existence of the heavens and the earth, jinn or man, and sun or
moon. When He intended to create the world, He scattered them before Him, and asked
them: Who is lour Lord?'
351

So the first to speak were the Messenger of Allah (SA), the Commander of the Faithful
(AS), and the Imams, may the blessings of Allah be upon them. They said: You are our
Lord. So he bore them with knowledge and religion.' He then said to the angels: These
are the bearers of My Knowledge and My Religion. They are My Authorized
Representatives in My Creation, and they are the ones to be asked.'
Then He said to the children of Adam: Acknowledge the Lordship of Allah, and obey
those to whom obedience is due!' Hence, they all replied: Yes our Lord, we
acknowledge.' Then He ordered the angels: Bear witness!' The angels said: We bear
witness. Lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection: Surely we were heedless of
this. Or you should say: Only our fathers associated others (with Allah) before, and we
were an offspring, after them: Wilt Thou then destroy us for what the vain doers died?"
O Dawud, our guardianship [wilayah] was emphasized in the covenant.
2. Tamim ibn Abd Allah ibn Tamim al-Qurashi said: my father said, on the authority of Ahmad
ibn Ali al-Ansari, on the authority of Abu al-Salt Abd al-Salam ibn Salih al-Hirawi that

H G H H H G G _

! 2 3 H G " Z C 2 G G %

H G 2 G O

G >
G G I G Y G O GL

G%G3 G H G E 4 _ %H G G O G % 3 G G G I G G %

H G 2
H >

E *EH G H G G7 >

% G GO G G I G E H GH G G7 I H H % H G E G 1/2

G G H G E 4 Z I G

G ! G

G G G % H G E G

2 G % H H % H G(R) Z C 2 G H H % H Z G2 Z G%G G G

H d E 4 _GZ G % H G G G H G G G G G G%G3 2G G%G
.

Al-Ma'mum asked Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) about the Word of Allah, the
Mighty and High: And He it is who created heaves and the earth in six days, and His
Empyrean was on the water, that He might try you, which of you is the best in action.
He thus, (AS) replied,
Verily, Allah the Blessed and Exalted, created the Empyrean, the water, and the angels
before the creation of heavens and the earth. The angels use to ponder over the
existence the Empyrean, the existence of the water, and the existence of Allah, the
Mighty and High. Then He place His Empyrean over the water to make His Omnipotence
352

evident to the angels so that they may know that He had power over all things. He then
raised the Empyrean by means of His Omnipotence, moving it and placing it over the
seven heavens. He created the heavens and the earth in six days, while He was in
possession of the Empyrean. Although He has the power of creating them in the blink
of an eye, He, the Mighty and High, created them over six days to show to the angels
that He was creating, one after another, so that they could ponder over what Allah,
exalted be His Remembrance, brought about in stages.
Allah did not create the Empyrean because He was in need of it. On the contrary, He is
Self-Sufficient without any need for the Empyrean and of anything He has created. He is
not subject to location within the Empyrean, because He does not possess a body.
Exalted is Allah, the Elevated and high, from the attributes of is Creation! As for His
Word, the Mighty and High: that He might try you, which of you is best in action. Sao
verily, He, the Mighty and High, crated His Creation to try them through His Obedience,
and His service, and not for the sake of trial and experiment, because He has always
been the All-knowing of Everything. Al-Ma'mum said: "You have relieved me. May Allah
relive you!"

353

Chapter Fifty: Al-Arsh wa Sifatuhu The Empyrean and Its
Description - 1 tradition

1. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: alHusayn ibn al-Hasan said: My father related to me, on the authority of Hannan ibn Sadir that

G7 E qG 2 _ G7 % Z G Z G >
G G H G " _ G n

m

G C % E G G G $

G }_ G G7 H G G7 G H G

2 H G n

G G G G%G G H G2
2 I C % G G G 2 % G G H

G7 I G 2 G G G H >
G G G G G G G H G G _ G

G G G q % G _ G n

G G7 G G L G L G

I G _ IG H G G 2 G G G H G G H G % H G" _ G n

G *
[ C G G ] m H E E G
H G7 % 2G G G I I G

G G G G G C G m G%G G C %HG G G

G >

G _ ! 2 3
G m H

G _ ! 2 3

G _ G G G GG G > ~G" Z H H G " G G G

G G >
354

G m

4 % I G 2 m G H
I 2H G ~ dG I H G G G O G G 3

G % 2 G % Z G H G " G G G G 3 G G G I G G%G G

G G G7 I GH G I I G H m GH %

m G m E GG G G%GO G7 G G E GG G Z I G%GO G7

G H G " GG G G G G

G H I G H ! 2 3

Z H d G%G H G I H
H G O H G%G G G G G G%_ G G G% H
Z G Z G % C G G G G Z G
.

I asked Abu Abd Allah (AS) about the Empyrean and the Throne. Hence, he said:
Verily, the Empyrean has many different meanings which differ on the basis of their
context in the Qur'an. By His Word: The Lord of the great Empyrean, He is that Great
Sovereign. And by His Word: The Most Compassionate God is firm on the Empyrean,
He encompasses by means of His Sovereignty, and this is sovereignty of qualities in
things.
The connection between the Empyrean and the Throne is unique as they are both
openings to the greatest openings of the unseen. Although they are both unseen, they
are both connected, because the Throne is the apparent opening from which are the
innovation and all the things. The Empyrean is the hidden opening in which is found
the knowledge of quality, existence, the divine decree, the boundaries, space, will
intent, knowledge of words, actions, neglect, and the knowledge of the return and the
beginning.
Thus, they are both connected openings in knowledge, because the sovereignty of the
Empyrean is different from the sovereignty of the Throne, and His Knowledge is more
unseen than the Knowledge of the Throne. Therefore, it is for this reason that he said:
The Lord of the great Empyrean, i.e. its description is grate than the description of the
Throne, and they are both connected in that."
I asked, "May I be your ransom. Why does it share the same merit as the Throne?"
He (AS) replied,
Verily, it shares in its merit because of the knowledge of quality they both contain.
However, the Throne has the apparent openings of the beginning and its whereabouts,
and the limits of contraction and expansion. Therefore, these two are partners: one of
them is the carrier of its partner in exchange. It is similar to the exchange of scholars,
so they may reason in their claim over the truth of these two, because Allah specifies
His Mercy to whomever He wills. And He is the Powerful, the Honorable.
355

Among the different descriptions of the Empyrean is that He, the Blessed and Exalted
said: Lord of the Empyrean from what they attribute (to Him). He described the
Empyrean of the Oneness, because a group had associated (Him with it), like I
explained to you. The Blessed and Exalted said: Lord of the Empyrean, i.e. Lord of the
Oneness from what they attribute.
A group attributed Him with two hands, so they said: The Hand of Allah is tied up. A
group attributed Him with two feet, and said: " "He put His Foot over the rock of the
Sacred House [bayt al-muqaddas], and from there He ascended to heaven." A group
attributed Him with fingertips, and said: "Verily, Muhammad (SA) said: I found the
coolness of His Fingertips on my heart." For the likeness of these attributes He said:
Lord of the empyrean from what they attribute (to Him), that Lord of the highest
example from what they resemble Him with.
For Allah is the highest attribute, which no one resembles, and He cannot be described
or imagined. That is the highest attribute.
The one who have not been given benefits of knowledge, describe their Lord with
adjectives which are below Him. They anthropomorphise Him and compare Him with
that which they are ignorant of. And you have been given only a little portion of
knowledge. Thus, He has no compeer, no likeness, and no equal.
And Allah's are the best names, with which no one is named but He. These are the ones
that He described in the Book, and said: Therefore, call on Him thereby, and leave alone
those who violate the sanctity of his names; ignorantly, and without knowledge.
Therefore, the ones who violate the sanctity of His Names without knowledge, and
describe Him out of ignorance, actually deny Him while thinking that they are doing
good deeds. That is why He has said: And most of them do not believe in Allah without
associating others (with Him). Hence, they are the ones who violate the sanctity of His
Names out of ignorance through misplacing His Names.
O Hannan! Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has commanded to take a group to be
the Guardians.' They are the ones Allah has bestowed with merit, and described them
in terms with which He has not described others. Thus, He sent Muhammad (SA). He
was a guide and leader to Allah until he passed away, with the authorization of the
Mighty and High. Then his successor stood in his place as a guide and leader with
knowledge according to the guidance and command of the Lord. He was followed by
the other Rightly-Guided Imams (AS) [at-Ammat al-Rashidun]."

356

Chapter Fifty-One: Anna al-Arsh Khuliqa Arbaan The Empyrean
was Created in Quarters - 1 tradition

1. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar, on the authority of Ali ibn Ismail, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority
of Ibrahim ibn Umar al-Yamani, on the authority of Abu al-Tafayl, on the authority of Abu
Jafar that

I H G " % 2 Z H H
H G " : G G _ G

H A

A
GC G G E G E G % H C
% G > A

G2 % H GI H % G G % G >H }

% _ m G%_ G G _2 m H G " 2 G G GG
G G H d E 2 _ G E 2

G O 2 G I % 3 H G Z d I G E G G G E I G 2 G E G E G >
OG G G O G I G E _ E G % % G 2

E 1/2
m I

.

Ali ibn al-Husayn (AS) said:
Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, created the Throne in quarters. He did not create
anything before except three things: the Air, the Pen, and the Light. Then He created
the Throne from different lights: then from the Light, He created green light that made
greenness, yellow light that made yellowness, red light that made redness, and white
light, which is the light of all lights from which is made day light.
He then made the Throne of seventy thousand thick layers. Each layer is like the first
throne to the lower one. There is not a throne that does not exalt and glorify its Lord
with praise with different sounds, and in different language. The sounds of the tongues
are so loud that if He wished them to be heard, they would destroy the mountains,
cities, and strongholds of the earth; the oceans would overtake the land, destroying
everything but itself.
The Throne has eight pillars. Each pillar has angels whose numbers is unknown to all
but Allah, the Mighty and High, and who exalt Him day and night without subsiding. If
anything were sensed of it, but what is above it, it will not stand for the blink of an eye
between it, and the sense of the omnipotence, the magnificence, the sublimity, the
glorification, the mercy, and then the knowledge. And there is no word to describe what
exists beyond this.
357

Chapter Fifty-Two: Mana Wasia Kursiyyuhu al-Samawati wa-alArd.The Meaning of His Knowledge Extend over the Heavens and
the Earth' - 5 traditions

>

1. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of al-Qasim ibn Muhammad,
on the authority of Sulayman ibn Dawud al-Minqari, on the authority of Hafs ibn Ghiyah that

.% G >
G H H G G G G 2 L d :
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: His
knowledge extends over the heaves and the earth.'
He replied, "His Knowledge."
2. My father (RA) said: Ali ib Ibrahim said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Ibn
Abu Umayr, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Sinan that

H >

>
G H H G G G7 G G2 G
. G m G H G _ G n

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: His knowledge extends over the heaves and the earth.'
He (AS) said: "The heavens and the earth, and whatever is between them, are in the
Throne [al-kursi], and the Empyrean [al-arsh] is the Knowledge (of Allah) over which no
one has power."
3. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said: Yaqub ibn Yazid said, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
RabiI, on the authority of Fjudayl ibn Yasar that

>
>
G H H G G G G2 L d

._ G n

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: His
knowledge extends over the heaves and the earth.'
Consequently, he (AS) replied, "O Fudayl! The heavens and the earth and everything
between them, are in the Throne."

358

4. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar (RA) said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of la-0hajjal, on the authority of
Thaalabah ibn Maymun, on the authority of Zurarah that

H >

>
G H H G G G G 2 L d :

>
G >

._ G n

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High His
knowledge extends over the heaves and the earth: Are the heavens and the earth
greater than the Throne, or is the Throne greater than the heavens and the earth?
He replied, "Nay, the Throne is greater than the heavens, the earth, and the sky as the
Throne encompasses everything."
5. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: al-Hasan ibn Aban said, on the
authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of Fadalah, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn
Bukayr, on the authority of Zurarah that

H >

>
G H H G G G G 2 L d :

. G G n

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High His
knowledge extends over the heaves and the earth: Are the heavens ad the earth greater
than the Throne, or is the Throne greater than the heaves and the earth?
He answered, "The Throne encompasses everything."

359

Chapter Fifty-Three: Fitrat Allah azza wa jalla al-Khalqq ala alTawhid. Allah made the Nature of the Creation upon Divine Unity -
10 traditions

1. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sinan, on the authority of al-Ala ibn Fudayl that

H H G G % d : G G2 G
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: The nature made by Allah is which He has made men.
He (AS) sait is Divine Unity."
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu
Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim that

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) to interpret: The nature made by Allah is which He
has made men. He (AS) replied, "It is Divine Unity."
3. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said: Muhammad ibn
Isa ibn Ubayd said, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the authority of Abd
Allah ibn Sinan that

G 3 I

H H G G % d : G G2 G

.

G G G%G _ G L G G H I G G
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) "What is the nature referred to in the Word of
Allah, the Mighty and High: "The nature made by Allah is which He has made men."
He responded, It is Islam. Allah placed this nature in them when He created them and
made a covenant with them regarding Divine Unity. Thus, He asked: Am I not your
Lord? The covenant encompassed all those who believe and all those who disbelieve.
4. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim; and Yaqub ibn Yazid, on the authority of
Ibn Fuddal, on the authority of Bukayr, on the authority of Zurarah that
360

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of the Mighty and High:
The nature made by Allah is which He has made men. He (AS) saie created them
with Divine Unity."
5. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ibn Fuddal, on the authority of Abu Jamilah, on the authority of Muhammad alHalabi that

H G G G7 G G2 G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: The nature made by Allah is which He has made men. He (AS) uttered, "He
created them with (a natural predisposition towards) Divine Unity."
6. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah on the authority of Ahmad and Abd Allah sons of
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Ali ibn Riab, on the
authority of Zurrarah that

H H G G G G 2 L d :

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the word of the Allah, the Mighty and High:
The nature made by Allah is which He has made men. He (AS) saie created them
all with (a natural predisposition towards) Divine Unity."
7. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ali ibn Hassan al-Wasiti, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn
Yunus, on the authority of Abd al-Rahman ibn Kathir freed slave of Abu Jafar that

H G G G7 G G2 G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: The nature made by Allah is which He has made men. He replied, "It is a natural
predisposition to accept Divine Unity, that Muhammad (SA) is the Messenger of Allah,
and that Ali is the Commander of the Faithful (AS)."

8. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad,
on the authority of his father, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn al-Mughirah, on the authority of
Ibn Muskan, on the authority of Zurarah that
361

G%G G G7 H H G L
m G H % dd 2 L I C % H G%G G G G G G G H
H H dG G G G m G G
E C G % H . I G I C
H I d G % G % G H

. H >
I said to Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS): May Allah be in peace with you! Explain to me the
Word of Allah, the Mighty and High, in His Book: "The nature made by Allah is which He
has made men." He (AS) responded, "He created them with a natural predisposition
towards Divine Unity at the time of the Covenant when they recognized that He was
their Lord." I asked, "Did they reply to Him?" Zurarah says, he (AS) then put his head
down, and after a while he (AS) saiad it not been so, then they would have not
known their Lord or the One who sustains them."
9. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim and
Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab and Yaqub ibn Yazid all three, on the authority
of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Ibn Udaynah, on the authority of Zurarah that

G I GH G G G G%G G G H H G G % d : E} G

G G G G!" % I G #
G GI G $ G G C G" H H
H k

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said:
I asked him (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High; Being upright for Allah,
not associating aught with Him, and about being upright. Thus, he (AS) replied, "It is
the natural predisposition that Allah placed in human being. There is no change in His
Creation." Then he added, "Allah created them with the recognition." Zurarah says: I
asked him about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: And when your Lord brought
forth from the children of Adam, from their backs. He (AS) explained, "He brought forth
from Adam's loins his progeny until the Day of Judgment. They all scattered before
Him. He introduced them, and showed them His Creation. Had it not been so, no one
would have recognized their Lord." He also added, "The Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
"Every child is born with a natural predisposition (towards Divine Unity), i.e. on the
recognition that Allah, the Mighty and High, is his Creator." Thus, that is the
explanation of His Word: And if you ask them who created the heaves and the earth,
they will certainly say: Allah.
10. Abu Ahmad al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Sarraj al-Hamdani said: Abu al-Qasim
Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Sarandibi said: Abu al-Hasan Muhammad ibn Abd Allah
362

ibn Haruna al-Rashid said in Halab that Muhammad ibn Adam ibn Abu Iyas said: Ibn Abu
Dhi'b said, on the authority of Nafi, on the authority of Ibn Umar that

H G " % G " I E I H G (R) G IG O A

C E I _ G H H E I

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
Do not hit your children because of their crying. Verily, during the first four months,
their cry is bearing witness that there is no god but Allah. During the next four months,
when they cry they are sending their blessings upon the Prophet and His Progeny (AS).
And during the next four months, they are praying for their parents.

363

Chapter Fifty-Four: Al-Bada' The Appearance - 11 traditions

2
1. My father (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Hajjal, on the authority of Ishaq ibn Thalabahh, on
the authority of Zurarah that

.G 2 G G E G H H G 2 : G G 2 }

One of the two, i.e. Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) or Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS), said:
"Allah, the Mighty and High, has not been served by anything like the Appearance."
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ayyub ibn Nuh, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the
authority of Hisham ibn Salim that

.G 2 G GG H H _ : G G2 G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"Allah, the Mighty and High, has not been revered with anything like the Appearance."
3. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said, on the authority of his father,
on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Muslim that

G E G G% d H Z G H H : G G2 G
. m #
_ m _ m H G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS)
"Allah, the Mighty and High, has not sent a Prophet [nabi] until He made a covenant
with him regarding these things: that he would serve no god but Allah, that he would
reject idols, and that Allah can hasten His decree or delay His Decree."
4. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim and Hafs ibn
al-Bakhtari and other these two, that

H G " L G 2 m G G G G7 G G2 G
.

364

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret this verse: Allah makes to pass
away and establishes what He pleases. He (AS) said: "Does Allah destroy other than
what exists? And does He establish other than that which was nonexistent?"
5. Hamzah ibn Muhammad al-Alawi (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim reported to us, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Marazim ibn
Hukaym that

H G m H C G dH2 3 m G G2 L G
C G H G G 2 G E G H H

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "No Prophet claimed to be a prophet until he
confirmed his belief in five things with Allah, the Mighty and High: the Appearance, the
Will, Prostration, Worship, and Obedience."
6. Hamzah ibn Muhammad al-Alawi (RA) said, on the authority of Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim,
on the authority of al-Rayyan ibn al-Salt that

.G 2 G %
G G H G " C Z G m _ L G

Al-Rida (AS) said: "Allah has never sent a prophet until he confirmed with Allah that he
would forbid alcohol, and that he believed in the Appearance."
7. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub
said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Yunus
ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the authority of Malik al-Juhani that

.G%G G G G G G 2 G G G7
H m m G G2 L G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"If people knew what reward there is in speaking about the Appearnac,e they would
never cease speaking about it."
8. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of Yunus, on the authority of
Mansur ibn Hazim that

d G G ! G G G G7 4 G G2 L d

2 G G G G7 G G G G!" G O

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): Is there anything in the knowledge of Allah today
that was not there yesterday? He (AS) replied, "No, May Allah disgrace anyone who
believes in such things!" I asked, "Is it correct that everything that has happened, and
everything that will happen until the Day of Judgment, is known to Allah?"
He (AS) replied, "Of course! It was so even before He created the creation."
365

9. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub
said, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Amir, on the authority of Muaalla ibn
Muhammad that

G%G3 G (R)G G G G H G G G 2 H H
G G G H G G G H G G H G _ G G

G G G G (R) G G G G G G G 2 ! 2 3 G%H G G G G

G H G%G G 2 G G7 G G%G 2 G d G7 H G G%G 2 G G G
G G G G G Z G Z G I G G 3 I G G 2 >

>

G G >

E E G E G" G H E E G
I G (R) % H G 2 G%G ! 2 3 G%H G _ G H G GG E 2G

m
G H G G I G 2 G G G G m

I 3 H G G H G G IG 3G I G G7 I Y H G G G 2 d Y

G G G I I H I G

The Learned (AS) was askeow is the knowledge of Allah?"
He (AS) replied,
He knows, He wills, He intends, He decrees, He predestines, and He makes to appear.
Therefore, He exercise what He predestines, He predestines what He decrees, and He
decrees what He intends. Thus, through His Knowledge is the Divine Will, through His
Will is the Intent, through His Intent is the Divine Decree, through His Decree is
predestination, and through His Predestination is the Exercise of His Will. Therefore,
the Knowledge (of Allah) has precedence over the Will (of Allah), the Will (of Allah) is
second, and the Intent (of Allah) is third. The Divine Decree is manifest in
predestination through the Exercise (of Allah's Will).
For Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is the Appearance in whatever He knows, whenever
He wills, and in whatever He intends for the decree of the things. Hence, if
predestination occurs with authorization then there is no appearance. So the
knowledge of the known exists before it. The Will in the originated is prior to itself. The
Intent in the intended precedes its existence. The Decree for these known things is
prior to their detachment and joining, evidently and obviously. Predestination through
exercise is inescapable from the effective possessors of bodies that can be perceived
366

through senses like color, smell, weight and measure, and whatever crawls or walks of
the humans, the jinn, the birds, the beasts, and other than that which are perceived
through senses.
Therefore, for Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is the Appearance, of what has no
existence, However, if the perceived conceptual existence occurs then there is no
Appearance. Allah does whatever he wills, and through His Knowledge He knows all
things prior to their existence. Through the Divine Will He identifies their attributes and
limits; and originate them before their disclosure. Through the Intent He differentiates
them in their colors, attributes and limits. Through the Divine Decree He decrees their
times, and knows their beginning and their end. Through Predestination He manifested
the places of mankind and led them to these. Through the Exercise of His Will He
explained their reasons for being, and manifested their mattes. That is the decree of the
Honorable, the All-Knowing.
Muhammad ibn Ali the Compiler of this book, may Allah help him in His obedience,
says: The Appearance is not the way the ignorant think, namely, that He appears to
regret. Exalted is Allah from that. However, it is mandatory upon us to confirm with
Allah, the Mighty and High, that He has the power of Appearance. The meaning of that
is: Verily, it is for Him to start something from His Creation to create it before
something, and then that thing becomes nonexistent, and He begins with something
other than it. Or He orders to do something then stops from doing it, or orders to stop
from something, then orders to do what He had stopped.
The examples of that would be the abrogation of previous Shariahs (to Islam),
changing of the direction of Qiblah, and the prescribed period [iddat] of a woman
whose husband has passed away. Allah does not command His Servants for a matter in
a specified time except when He knows that it is in their interest in that time. And He
knows that in another time their interest is in stopping them from the like of which He
commanded them to do. Therefore, in all times He commands them for what is in their
interest. Thus, whoever confirms for Allah, the Mighty and High, that for Him is to do
what He wills, to destroy what He wills, to create in its place what He wills, to advance
what He wills, to retard what He wills, to command what He wills and how He wills, to
command what He wills and how He wills, then he has confirmed the doctrine of the
Appearance.
Allah, the Mighty and High, has not revered anything better than the confirmation that
for Him is the creation, the command, advancement, and to retard and establishing
what does not exist, and to destroy what does exist. The belief in the Appearance is a
rejection of the Jews, because they said: Verily, Allah concluded the affair. Hence, we
said: Verily, Allah is in a new manifestation everyday. He gives life, and He kills. He
gives sustenance, and does what He wills. The Appearance is not from regret. It is
certainly manifestation of a matter. The Arabs say: A man appeared in my way' i.e.
manifested. Allah, the Mighty and High said: And there shall appear to them from Allah
that which they had not been expecting, i.e. become plain to them.
Whenever Allah, Exalted be His Remembrance, observes that a servant observes the
ties of kinship, He increases his life; and whenever He observes that a servant severs
the ties of kinship, He decreases his life. Whenever Allah observes that a servant
fornicates, He reduces his life. Whenever Allah observes that a servant fornicates, He
reduces his sustenance and shortens his life; and whenever he observes that a servant
is chaste, He increases his sustenance and lengthens his life.
10. The aforementioned is supported by the following tradition:

367

.G G G " G7 % G G H
Al-Sadiq (AS) said:"Nothing appeared to Allah regarding my son Ismail when He cut
him off by death before me, so that it may be known that he was not the Imam after
me."
11. The following astonishing tradition has been related to me on the authority of Abu allHusayn al-Asadi (RA) that

GE E G G H G%G G G G" G " G G G " G7 % : G H H
Al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"Nothing appeared to Allah as regards to my father Ismail (AS) when He ordered His
father Ibrahim (AS) to slaughter him, but He ransomed him with a momentous
sacrifice."
The Compiler of his book says: In this tradition with both its meanings, I have my
consideration. However, I have transmitted them here for the meaning of the word
appearance' [bada']. Allah is the Director to the correctness.

368

Chapter Fifty-Five: Al-Mashi't wa-al-Iradah The Will and the Intent -
13 traditions

1. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of
Umar ibn Udhaynah, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The Will is emerged [muhdatha]."
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Abd Allah, on the authority of Abd
Allah ibn Maymun al-Qaddah, on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad, that

G 2 % Ga G! % G H G G7 H Z H G " E G G G : G%G
G " G " G G " L G G " G " G G L G G G

L % G L G G G " L G
.

His father, Muhammad al-Baqir (AS), said: I was aid to Ali (AS), "A man speaks about
Divine Will." He (AS) saiall him to me." The reported says: So he was called to his
presence. Thus, Imam Ali (AS) asked him, "O servant of Allah, did Allah create you out
of His Will or out of your will?" He replied, "Out of His own Will." He (AS) asked, "Does
he make you ill when He wishes or when you wish?" He answered, "When He wishes."
He (AS) questioned, "Does He cure you when He wishes or when you wish?" He
responded, "When He wishes." He (AS) enquired, "Does he make you enter (this world)
as He wishes or as you wish?" He answered, "As He wishes." Hence, Ali (AS) said to
him, "If you had said other than this, I would have hit your neck.
3. And with the same chain of transmission that

L 3 % G% G H G G 2 3 G }

I GE _ G GE O _ G G G H H
H G " G H G (R) % O G
369

G% G H G " 2 G m G 2 H G " m G m
G O

A man from the followers of the Umayyad dynasty entered the presence of Abu Abd
Allah al-Sadiq (AS) or Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS), so we feared for him (AS) and said to
him: "You should conceal yourself or we should tell him that you are not here."
However, he (AS) said: On the contrary, grant him permission to enter my presence.
Verily, the Messenger of Allah (SA) has said: Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, is at
the tongue of every speaker, and is at the hand of every extender.' Therefore, this
speaker does not have the ability to say but what Allah, the Mighty and High, wills, and
this extender is not capable of extending his hand but for what Allah wills.
Hence, he entered the Imams (AS) presence, enquired about things, believed in them
and then left.
4. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Said al-Hamdani said: Ali
ibn al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Fuddal said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Marwan
ibn Muslim, on the authority of Thabit ibn Abu Safiyyah, on the authority of Sad ibn al-Khaffaf,
on the authority of al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah that

G L G (R) G H G " G G3 G!" H H I GG G
. G H G " H G3 G G G G G " G3 G
The Commander of the Faithful (AS) said: "Allah, the Mighty and High, revealed to
David [Dawud] (AS): O David, you will and I will. However, your will is not except what I
will. Therefore, if you submit to My Will, I will bestow you with what you will. However, if
you do not submit to My Will, I will trouble you in what you wish. In the end, it is always
My will that will prevail.
5. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Isa ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Sulayman
ibn Jafar al-Jafari that

.E _ G Z G O Z G !
H G >
Al-Rida (AS) said: "The Divine Will and the Divine Intent are part of the Attributes of
Action. So whoever claims that Allah, the Exalted, has always been the Intending Willer,
then he is not a (true) monotheists."
6. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with
them) both said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa,
on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Nasr al-Bazanfi that
Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) said:

370

q G! G G G I G G
m I H G " % L : _ G G

G G O
H G!" L H G H G G G G L L GH G G $ ! 2 3

E _ G G G E G Z G Z G Z G G G L

H d ~ G _G G 3 _ G ! L G G 3 G ! G G Y G
. G3 E 4 H L
m
I asked him, "Some of our scholars believe in determinism [jabr], while others believe in
ability [istitaah]." Therefore, he (AS) replied to me, Write down: Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, said: O son of Adam! Your will is subject to My Will. You fulfill your obligations
through My Power, and through My Bounty you have the strength to disobey me. I have
made you seeing, hearing, and strong. Whatever good reaches you is from Allah, and
whatever evil reaches you is from your own self. So I am worthier of your goods deeds
than yourself, and you are worthier of your bad deeds than I am. This is why I will not
be asked about what I do, while you will be asked about what you did.
I have made systematic for you everything you wish.
7. My father said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab said,
on the authority of Jafar ibn basher, on the authority of al-Arzami that
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:

G (R) Z G Z 2 Z G qC G

G 3
H H G (R) G G L G E > $

3 G

.

G m

Ali (AS) had a slave called Qanbar, who loved his mater Ali (AS) very much. When Ali
(AS) used to go out, Qanbar would go out behind him with a sword. So Ali (AS) saw
him one night, and asked him, "O Qanbar, what is it?" He replied, "I walk behind you
because I know how people are, and I feared for you, O Commander of the Faithful."
The Imam (AS) questioned, "Woe to you! Are you guarding me from the inhabitants of
the heaven or the earth?" He answered, "No, only from the inhabitants of the earth."
Ali (AS) said: "Verily, the inhabitants of the earth cannot do anything against me
except by the will of Allah, the Mighty and High, from Heaven. So go back."
Thus, he returned.
8. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said: Muhammad
ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ashari said, on the authority of Musa ibn Umar, on the
authority of Ibn Sinan, on the authority of Abu Said al-Qummat that
371

. GH G G H G 2 H G G G 2
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Allah created the Divine Will before all things. He
then created all things by means of His Will."
9. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ali ibn Ma'bad, on the authority of Durust ibn Abu Mansur, on the authority of
Fudayl ibn Yasar that

G G G%G G G H G " 4
qH G m G G 2 L G

G G2GG E G % m qH G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: He wills, He intends, He dislikes, and He is
displeased. He wills that nothing should exist without His Knowledge, and He intends
similar to that. He dislikes it to be said of Him that He is the third of the three,' and He
is displeased with His Servant's' disbelief.
10. Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Abd Allah ibn Ahmad al-Isbahani al-Aswari said: Makki ibn Ahmad
ibn Sadwayh al-BurdhaI said: Abu Mansur Muhammad ibn al-Qasim ibn Abd al-Rahman alAtaki reported to us that Muhammad ibn Ashras said: Bushr ibn al-Hakam and Ibrahim ibn
Nasr al-Suryani both said: Abd al-Malik ibn Harun ibn Antarah said: Ghiyadh ibn al-Mujib
said, on the authority of al-Hasan al-Basri that Abd Allah ibn Umar that

G H G " G 2 H G G G
G3 G H L L G G (R)G G G G H L L GH G G $ H H

G G G Y G G G3 G G
H G!" L H GG G G G G G G L
L G C H Z L G G2 G ! L G G G (R)G !
H G ! G G H G G G L G _ G G Z

G _ G 3HG G $ G 3 G G G G G

G% > H G " G G _

The Prophet (SA) said:
372

Knowledge has precedence. The Pen has dried up. The Decree has been accomplished
through the Book, and confirmed through the Message. Good fortune is from Allah, and
adversity s from Allah, the Mighty and High." Abd Allah ibn Umar says: The
Messenger of Allah (SA) used to transmit the following tradition from Allah, the Mighty
and High, that Allah, the Mighty and High, says: O son of Adam! You wish for what you
wish through My Will. You intended for what you intend for through My Bounty. You
disobey through the strength that I have given you. You fulfill your obligations through
the health, protection, and forgiveness that I have granted you. I am worthier of your
favor than yourself. And you are worthier of your sin that I am. Hence, any good which
reached you is reward for your good deeds. And any evil that reaches you in
punishment for the sins you have committed. As a result of your mistrust in Me, I have
deprived you of My Mercy. All praise belongs to Me. And against you is evident proof
(of your evil-doing). I have a way over you for your disobedience, and reward and the
best outcome for you with favour. I do not call upon you to warn you. I do not hold you
responsible for issues of honor. And I do not burden you with more than you can bear.
And I did not impose you with the trust except what you have power over. I am pleased
with you for Myself with what you are pleased with yourself from Me.
Abd al-Malik explainewill never punish you except for what you do (wrong)."
11. Tamim ibn Abd Allah ibn Tamim al-Qarashi (RA) said: My father said, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Ali al-Ansari, on the authority of Abu al-Salt Abd al-Salam ibn Salih al-Hirawi that

C H H G G G G % _

G G(R)G H G " G 3 E G

G 3 L d Z G I C

H n

G G G GG H EqG G G _ G G%G E G G G G%G G G

G H G G% > G L o

2 3 d G_ G Z IG H G!" G E G 2G H H G L

G G G G G G Z G I C

G _G Z Z m G IG G L G #

G G H G7G n x C G

G G G G(R)G H G " G 3 E G

H n
G G G I % G" G G G(R)G H G " G G L I H G I G G G {

373

G G H G G G G G!" HG" G " Z _ 2 Z H L

.

One day al-Mamum asked Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS).
"O son of the Messenger of Allah! What is the meaning of the Word of Allah, the Mighty
and High: And if your Lord had pleased, surely all those who are in the earth would
have believed, all of them; will you then force men till they become believers? And it is
not for a soul to believe except by Allah's permission. Consequently, al-Rida (AS)
replied, My father Musa ibn Jafar related to me, on the authority of his father Jafar ibn
Muhammad, on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn Ali, on the authority of his
father Ali ibn al-Husayn, on the authority of his father al-Husayn ibn Ali, on the
authority of his father Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) that The Muslims said to the Messenger of
Allah (SA): "O Messenger of Allah! If you compel the people over whom you have
power to embrace Islam, then our numbers would increase, and we would have
strength over our enemies." The Messenger of Allah (SA) repliecould never face
Allah, the Mighty and High, if I innovated and acted on my own without instruction.
Surely, I am not those who force people (into faith)." Hence, Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, revealed: O Muhammad! And if your Lord had pleased, surely all those who are
in the earth would have believed, all of them; through (personal) commitment or
through compulsion. They would have believed as those who accept faith after
observation, and seeing the strength of the Hereafter. If you compelled them to believe,
they would not deserve any reward or praise from Me. Although I want them to believe, I
want them to do so freely, and without compulsion. That way, they will earn the right to
be in My Proximity, and to receive My Honor, through eternal life in Paradise. Will you
then force men till they become believers? As for the Word of the Mighty and High: And
it is not for a soul to believe except by Allah's permission, it does not mean that the
soul has been forbidden from believing. Rather, it means that the soul does not believe
but by the will of Allah. For a soul to believe Allah's Will is His Command. The soul is
not forced or compelled to believe. Rather, he commits the soul to belief when it is
devoid of force or compulsion." Al-Ma'mun said: "You have relieved me O Abu alHasan. May Allah relieve you!"
12. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) both said:
Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris both said, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ashari, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the
authority of Ali ibn Mabad, on the authority of Durust, on the authority of Fudayl ibn Yasar
that

m % G % G d m G Z G
m G G2 L G
G % m qH G G G G%G G G H G " 4

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Allah willed for me to be capable, and not to be the
does." The reported says: I also heard him saying that He wills, He intends, He dislikes,
and He is displeased. He wills that nothing should exist in His Sovereignty without His
374

Knowledge, and He intends similar to that. He dislikes it to be said that He is the third
of three,' and He is displeased with the disbelief of His Servants.
13. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) both said:
Muhammad ibn Yahya la-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris both said, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ashari that Yaqub ibn Yazid said, on the authority of Ali
ibn Hassan, on the authority of Ismail ibn Abu Ziyad al-Shairi, on the authority of Thawr ibn
Yazid, on the authority of Khalid ibn Sadan, on the authority of Muadh ibn Jabal that

H G G G G%G3 G G G G G }
G G G 3 $ G H H G G
G H L L GH G G $ m ! 2 3 H G " GUG G G G G

G G G Y G G G3 G G G3 G H L L G G (R)G G G

_G G 3 _ G ! L G G 3 G ! d G G O
H G!" L H GG G~ G G G G G
G G" G~ G (R)G Z L G C H Z L G

H G ! G G H G G G L G _

H G " G G _ G _ G 3HG G $ G 3 G G G G G

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
Knowledge had precedence. The Pen has dried up. And the Divine Decree has been
completed by the Book and confirmed by the Message. Good fortune is from Allah, the
Mighty and High, and belongs to those who believe in Allah and fear Him. Adversity is
for those who reject the guardianship [wilayah] of Allah over the believers and who
reject His Immunity for the polytheists. The Messenger of Allah (SA) then continued,
I transmit my tradition from Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, He says: O son of Adam!
You will through My Will. You intend through My Intent. You disobey through My
Strength. You fulfill your obligations through the health I have given you through My
Help and My Protection. I am worthier of your good deeds than you are. And you are
worthier of your evil deeds than I am. Any good that reaches you is reward for your
good deeds. And any evil that befalls you is punishment for your evil deeds. Through
My Favour over you, you have strength to obey Me. Since you do not put your trust in
Me, I have deprived you of My Mercy. All praise belongs to Me. And you shall be judge
on the basis of clear evidence. I have a way over you for your disobedience, and good
reward for you with favour. I do not call upon to warn you. I do not hold you responsible
for issues of honor, and I do not burden you with more than you can bear. I did not
impose anything on you but what you confirmed yourself. I am please with you for
Myself with what you are pleased with yourself for Me.

375

Chapter Fifty-Six: Al-Istitaah Capability - 25 traditions

1. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Isa, on the authority of Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi that Abu Shuayb Salih ibn Khalid al-Mahamili,
on the authority of Abu Sulayman al-Jammal, on the authority of Abu Basir that

. Gc$G ^ GO^ G G G GL G G G G E 4 % d : G G 2 G
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the issue of capability. Hence, He (AS)
replied: "The issue of capability is not from my statement or the statement of my
forefathers.
The Compiler of this book says: He means by this is that it is neither from my statement or the
statement of my forefathers that we say of Allah, the Mighty and High: Verily, He is capable.
Like the people in the time of Isa (AS) said: Is your Lord capable of sending down to us
food from Heaven?
2. Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab said in Naysabur that Ahmad ibn al-Fadl ibn
al-Mughayrah said: Abu Nasr Mansur ibn Abd Allah ibn Ibrahim al-Isfahani said: Ali ibn Abd
Allah said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab, on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Abu al-Husayn al-Qurayzi, on the authority of Sahl ibn Abu Muhammad alMissisi that

_ GZ 2 : E H G }
H H G G % G G H G " Z {

. Z G H G " G G G Z H G G G ! 2 3 G G

Abu Abd Allah Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) said:
A servant cannot act or move unless the ability to act is given to him by Allah, the
Mighty and High. Verily, the legal capacity [taklif] from Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
has occurred after the capability. Thus, no one has legal capacity except the capable.
3. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan ibn
Aban said, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of Ubayd ibn Zurarah that
Hamzah ibn Humran related to me that

Z G% L G2 G G G G G G G2 L d

A
C m % H G(R) G % 4 G" % k
376

G m H G " 2G G _ ! 2 3

G G G G%GO G G G G (R)G
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the issue of ability, but he did not answer
me. So I entered his presence at another time and said:
"May Allah be in peace with you! A doubt has entered my heart which nobo0dy can
remove but you." He (AS) said: Verily, what is in your hear will not harm you?"
I said: May Allah be in peace with you! AI believe: Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, does
not burden His Servants with more than they can bear. They do not do anything except
by the Intent, Will, Predestination and Decree of Allah.
He (AS) responded, "This is the religion of Allah in which I believe, and in which my
forefathers believed." Or he (AS) said something along those lines.
The Compiler of this book says: Allah's Will and His Intent refer to His Command, and the
pleasure found in His Obedience. And in the disobedience is commandment to refrain and
forbiddance from them through restraint and warning.
4. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (may Allah be pleased with
them) both said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqi, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Yahya
al-Sayrafi, on the authority of Sabah, al-Hadhdha' that

U

. Y % I G G GG G GG

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said:
Zurarah asked him (AS) while I was present, "Are we capable of fulfilling the obligations
Allah has made obligatory on us in His Book? And are we capable of refraining from the
prohibitions which Allah has made obligatory upon us?" He (AS) thus said: "Yes."
5. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar (RA) said: My father said, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hakam, on the authority of Abd
Allah ibn Bukayr, on the authority of Hamzah ibn Humran that

q H H H G " Y L G%G3 G%G H Z ^ H G " G G2 GG L

m G%G G G G G G G IG I H G E Y _G

G%G G G H G G G G G IG H G G G G G!" G 3 G (R) % I

I said to Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "We have something to discuss." He (AS) said:
"Go ahead." I said: We believe: Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, commands us what
to do and what not to do. He has decreed and intended the length of life and traces for
every soul. He gave each soul the ability to obey Him and to fulfill His Commands.
However, if people were to neglect this, they would be questioned about the capability
and strength to obey Him. He (AS) then said: "This is the righteous way, if you do not
revert from it."
6. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) both said: Sad ibn
Abd Allah and Abd Allah ibn Jafar al-Himyari both said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Fuddal, on the authority of Abu
Jamilah al-Mufaddal ibn Salih, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Halabi that

H G E 4 C G IG G G H G " 2G G : G G2 G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: The servants (of Allah) have not been commanded to
do anything more than what they are capable of doing. Therefore, people re able to
refrain from whatever they have been enjoined to refrain, and whatever they do not
have the ability to refrain from has not been required of them. However, there is no
good in people (who do not fulfill their religious obligations.)
7. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said: Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab said, on the authority of Ali ibn
Asbat that

G 3/4
E G G 2 G m G G G G _ G L d

G! 3/4

_ G L G L H H G G G q 2 % G G

G m H G (R) G H Z G G ~ G G G
G G G G G 3/4
H H 2

. E 2 G m E o

G (R)G G Z G H G ~ G%G3 G " %
Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) was asked about the issue of ability. He replied, "A servant is
capable when he possesses four characteristics: his route is free from trouble, his
body is healthy, he has all his limbs, and has a means of sustenance provided to him
by Allah, the Mighty and High." I asked, "May I be your ransom! Explain these reasons
for me." He explained, In order to be capable, a servant needs to have a route free from
trouble. He needs to have a healthy body. And he needs to have all his limbs. He may
intend to fornicate, but at first he does not find a woman then he finds one. Then, either
he would be protected by Allah and he would stop from it as Yusuf (AS) did; or Allah
would abandon him between him and his intentions. Thus, he would fornicate and
would be labeled a fornicator. He has not obeyed Allah from compulsion, and did not
disobey because he was coerced.

378

8. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan ibn
Aban said, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the
authority of al-Husayn ibn al-Mukhtar, on the authority of Ismail ibn al-Jabir, that

H G " : G G 2 G

H I % I G%G G G!" G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, created a creation
and knew they will not proceed to Him. He command them what they should o, and
what they should not do. He never commands people to do something, unless He gives
them the means to do it. And He never commanded people to refrain from doing
something unless He gives them the means from refraining from it. People never obey
or disobey but by the permission of Allah, the Mighty and High, i.e. with His Knowledge.
9. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan ibn
Aban said, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of Fadalah ibn Ayyub, on
the authority of Aban ibn Uthman, on the authority of Hamzah ibn Muhammad al-Tayyar that

C G!" H H G G G G 2 L d
% I G%G G H G 4 H G G % I G H G%G G G
G m

. G G%G H H ! G G H G "

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: And
verily they were called upon to make obeisance while yet they were safe.
He (AS) said: "The capable are capable of fulfilling the obligations that have been
imposed on them. And the capable are capable of refraining from the prohibitions that
were imposed on them. They will be tried through both obligation and prohibition."
Then he added, "There is nothing which has been commanded or prohibited by Allah,
the Exalted, the Mighty and High, that is not a trial and predestined."
10. My father and Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) both said: Sad ibn Abd Allah
and Abd Allah ibn Jafar al-Himyari both said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Isa, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of al-Ala' ibn Razin, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that

G H H H G G G G2 L d

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: And
pilgrimage to the House is incumbent upon men for the sake of Allah, (upon) everyone
who is able to undertake the journey to it. He (AS) saie should have the means to
379

perform the pilgrimage [hajj]." I asked, "What happens if someone offers to pay for your
pilgrimage, and you fill embarrassed about accepting his offer?"
He (AS) replied, "Such a person would be counted among those who have the ability (to
perform the pilgrimage)."
11. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) both said: Sad ibn
Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Khalid al-Barqi, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the
authority of Hisham ibn Salim, on the authority of Abu Basir that

G m H G I d qG H G E G C G%

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Whoever is offered the means to perform the
pilgrimage, even if it means riding on the back of a mutilated, mangled tailed donkey
has the means of performing the pilgrimage, even if he refuses the offer."
12. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) both said: Sad ibn
Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Sad
ibn Janah, on the authority of Awf ibn Abd Allah al-Azdi, on the authority of his paternal uncle
that

G G G H G " 3 I H Y L G G G G G G2 L d :
. (c)
% 2 G G G G7E G "
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (as) about the issue of capability. So he (as)
responded, "Have they done so?" I said: "Yes. They claim that the ability to do
something applied only at the onset of the action and the intention at the time of the
action, but not before it." He (AS) replied, "These people have disbelieved."
13. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Yaqub ibn Yazid, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of some of our scholars who he
transmitted from, that

GE Z G G H G " GZ 2 m % G G G 2 G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "A servant (of Allah) is not able to accomplish an
action unless he has the ability to do so. Sometimes he has the ability to accomplish an
action, but he does not do it. However, he can never accomplish an action unless he
has the ability to do so."

380

14. My father (RA) said; Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn al-Hakam that

G H H H G G G7 G G2 G

b Z G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: And pilgrimage to the House is incumbent upon men for the sake of Allah, (upon)
every one who is able to undertake the journey to it. What does He mean by this? He
(AS) replied, "He means that whoever has a healthy body, a route free from trouble,
proper provision, and a mode of transportation.
15.My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) both said: Sad ibn
Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Abd
Allah ibn Muhammad al-Hajjal al-Asadi, on the authority of Thalabah ibn Maymun, on the
authority of Abd Al-Ala ibn Ayun, that

2 3H Z

G G G G7 G G2 G

. Z

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) asked to interpret this verse: Had it been a near advantage
and a short journey, they would certainly have followed you, but the tedious journey
was too long for them; and they swear by Allah: If we had been able, we would certainly
have gone forth with you; they cause their own souls to perish, and Allah knows that
they are most surely liars. He (AS) said: "They indeed had the ability. Allah knew that
they would have carried out their duty had it been a short and advantageous journey."
16. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) both said: Sad ibn
Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa said, on the authority of Ali ibn Abd Allah, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Barqi that

m I Y

G H H G G G7 G G2 G

.G k

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: And they swear by Allah: If we had been able, we would certainly have gone forth
with you; they cause their own souls t perish, and Allah knows that they are most
surely liars. He (AS) said: "Allah, the Mighty and High, has refuted their statement: If we
381

had been able, we would certainly have gone forth with you; stating that they did
indeed have the means of going forth."
17. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) both said: Sad ibn
Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ali ibn
Abd Allah, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Abu al-Hasan
al-Hadhdha', on the authority of al-Mualla ibn Khunays

C G!" H H G%G G G m G G2 GG L
.

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "What is the meaning of the word of the Mighty
and High: And, verily, they were called upon to make obeisance while yet they were
safe." He replied, "They had the ability."
18. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on
the authority of all three Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa; Muhammad ibn Abd al-Hamid and
Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Abu Nasr, on the authority of some of our scholars that

_ GZ 2 : G G2 G
H G" H H G G % G G H G " Z {
.Z G H G " G G G Z H G G G G G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "A servant cannot accomplish an action unless
Allah, the Mighty and High, has granted him the ability of doing so. Verily, the legal
capacity [taklif] from Allah has occurred after the ability. Thus, no one has legal
capacity except for the capable."
19. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu
Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim that

H G G I H E 4 I E G 2G

2 G H G 2 G H G 2 E _ E G
G H G " Z G3 Z G$ 2 I
.G 2 G 2

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS):
Allah does not oblige His Servants to complete an action, nor does He forbid them form
anything, without giving them the ability to do so. Then, and only then, He commands
them to complete certain actions or to refrain from certain actins. Therefore, a servant
(of Allah) cannot obey or disobey unless he has been given the ability to do so. The
ability to act or to desist from action precedes the command, the action, apprehension,
and delight.
382

20. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ali ibn alHakam, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim, on the authority of Sulayman ibn Khalid that

.G 2 G 2 G E _ E G G H G " 2 G 2 G m G G 2 L G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Apprehension and delight do not occur from a
servant unless he has been granted the ability for apprehension and delight."
21. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn alHusayn, on the authority of both Abu Shuayb al-Mahamili and Safwan ibn Yahya, on the
authority of Abd Allah ibn Muskan, on the authority of Abu Basir that

2 G G >
a

G m % G : G G2 G
. G G G 2 H G " E E 2 G H H G d G G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
When a group of people were debating before him about the deeds and actins, I heard
him say, "The ability to act precedes the action. Allah, the Mighty and High, did not
command anything that would cause fear or delight until He granted His Servant with
the ability to act."
22. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Yaqub ibn Yazid, on the
authority of Muruk ibn Ubayd, on the authority of Amr one of our scholars that

m Z G! H G " % G G 2 d

G (R) qC G 3 O 3 n
3 G % G G 2 Y
3 o

. H G C aH G Z % _ 3 Y G " % 3

I said to Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AShave a family member who belongs to the
Qadariya and who believes that we are able of doing so and so, and able of not doing
so and so. So Abu Abd Allah (AS) said: "tell him: "Do you have the ability to remember
what you abhor, and to forget what you like?' If he says: No,' then he has denounced
his statement, and if he sas: Yes,' then do not speak to him again, for he has claimed
to be God."
23. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Abu al-Khayr Slih ibn Abu Hammad said:
Abu Khalid al-Sajistani related to me, on the authority of Ali ibn Yaqtin, on the authority of Abu
Ibrahim (AS) that

383

G G GG G IG_ G G G7
G G G E G GG G H
G GG H L G " G G% C G G G G G

G H L G " G%G G G7 %

G H L G G H L G " 4 G G
G GG G G G H H G G G H G C L H G G G G

. L A

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) passed by a group in Kufah while they were
arguing about the Divine Decree. Thus, he asked their speaker, "Are you able to act
because of Allah, with Allah or without Allah?"
The person did not know how to answer. So the Commander of the Faithful (AS) said:
Verily, if you claim that you are able to act because of Allah, then you are not in trouble.
However, if you claim that you are able to act with Allah, then you have claimed to be an
associate with Him in His sovereignty and if you claim that you are able to act without
Him, then you have testified to a god other than Allah, the Mighty and High.
He replied, "No, O Commander of the Faithful! I am able to act because of Allah."
So the Imam (AS) saif you had said something else, I would have hit your neck."
24. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority
of Yaqub ibn Yazid, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Hariz ibn Abd
Allah, on the authority of Abu Abd Allah (AS) that

G _ d G GH G G G G2 G

. E G G G G 7 G G7 n
m

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
"Nine things have been raised from My Ummah: error, forgetfulness, coercion,
weakness, ignorance, compulsion, jealousy, evil omen, and the evil thoughts form the
whisper (of Satan) which they do not say."
25. Tamim ibn Abd Allah ibn Tamim al-Qarashi (RA) said in Farghanah that my father said,
on the authority of Ahmad ibn Ali al-Ansari, on the authority of Abd al-Salam ibn Salih alHirawi that

G H H H G G _ d d

G m o

_ o
_ G G G H G " Z

384

G m I H G G G EqG G G _ G G G
.

Al-Mamum asked al-Rida (AS) about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: They
whose eyes were under a cover from My Reminder and they could not even hear.
Consequently, he (AS) replied,
Verily, covering the eyes does not stop them from remembering Allah, and
remembering Allah cannot be done with the eyes. However, Allah, the Mighty and High,
has compared those who reject the guardianship of Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) with
blindness, because they use to find the words of the Prophet (SA) burdensome, and
they could not bear to hear them.
Al-Mamun then said: "You have relieved me. May Allah relieve you!"

385

Chapter Fifty-Seven: Al-Ibtila' wa-al-Ikhtibar The Trial and the Test -
3 traditions

2
1. My father (RA) said: Ahmad ibn Idris said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Yahya ibn Imran al-Ashari, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Sindi, on the authority of Ali
ibn al-Hakam, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim that

. G G C G%G H G " E E 2 G : G G2 G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"There is nothing which causes fear or which causes delight [qabd wa bast] in which
Allah has not placed a favor and a trial (for His Servants)."
2. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Isa ibn Abid, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the authority of Hamzah ibn
Muhammad al-Tayyar that

. G H G G%G H G " E E 2 G : G G 2 G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"There is nothing which causes fear or delight which is devoid of will [mashiyyah],
destiny [qada'] and trial [ibtila']."
3. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Fudalah ibn Ayyub, on the authority of
Hamzah ibn Muhammad la-Tayyar that

G H H G G G%G H G " % G%G H G 2 G%G 4 : G G2 G
. .
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"There is no action which Allah has commanded to do or which Allah has prohibited
form doing, and which causes fear or delight, which is not a trial decreed from Allah,
the mighty and High."

386

Chapter Fifty-Eigth Al-Saadah wa-al-Shaqawah Privilege and
Adversity - 6 traditions

1. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq said: Muhammad ibn Yaqub said: Ali
ibn Muhammad said who eliminated the source of the report, on the authority of Shuayb alAqarqufi, on the authority of Abu Baisr that

G G G L G G O % d Z G G G2 G L : E G G

I C G G 2 G IG G G G%G G G7 I H G G

G%G G H G G q G G G H G%_ G G%G G m H H H G
G O

G G G 2 G G IG G H G G G G q % G G G G G I
3d G " G%G G G7 I 2 G
G H G G G ! % G H G % G G 2 G" I
. G G%G G G IG 3 [Z ]
I was sitting before Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) and a questioner asked him, "May I be
your ransom, O son of the Messenger of Allah (SA)! How does adversity reach the
sinners so that He punished them for their actions out of His Knowledge?
Abu Abd Allah (AS) replied,
O questioner, Allah, the Mighty and High, knows that no one from His Creation can truly
rise. When He knows this, He bestowed His lovers the strength for His recognition and
took away from them the weightiness of the action with the reality of what they deserve.
He gave the disobedient the strength through which they disobey. Due to His prior
Knowledge, He did not prohibit them from accepting Him because His Knowledge is
better about the reality of confirmation. They act in accord with His Prior Knowledge,
despite the fact they ar able to desist from His disobedience.
This is the meaning of He wills what He wills', and it is a secret.
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said: Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab said, on the authority of Ali ibn
Asbat, on the authority of Ali ibn Abu Hamzah, on the authority of Abu Basir that

. G 3 G L 2 H H H G G G7 G G2 G

Abu Abd Allah (A)S about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: They shall say: O
our Lord! Our adversity overcame us.
He (AS) said: "They faced adversity as a result of their actions."
387

3. Al-Sharif Abu Ali Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abd Allah ibn al-Hasan ibn
al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) said: Ali ibn Muhammad ibn
Qutaybah al-Naysaburi said, on the authority of al-Fadl ibn Shadhan, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr that

H G%_ G G7 G C G

% G G 3/4

L H H % G G I 2 G G HG H H

% G G ^H 3/4
H G 2 G G" G HG
I asked Abu al-Hasan Musa ibn Jafar (AS) about the meaning of the Word of the
Messenger of Allah (SA): "The adverse is one who had been adverse in the womb of his
mother, and the privileged in one who had been privileged in womb of his mother."
So he (AS) replied,
The adverse person is he who Allah knows from the womb of his mother that he will
perform the deeds of the adverse. And the privileged person is the one who Allah
knows from the womb of his mother that he will perform the deeds of the privileged.
I asked him, ,"Then what is the meaning of his (SA) Word: All of you act! Everything
has been made easy when created.'"
He replied,
Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, created the jinn and the human beings to serve Him
and not to disobey Him. Hence, the Word of the Mighty and High: And I have not
created the jinn and the men except that they should serve Me. Therefore, He made
everything easy when He created it. Woe to him who preferred blindness over
guidance.
4. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the authority of al-Nadr ibn Suwayd, on the authority
of Yahya ibn Imran al-Halabi, on the authority of Mualla Abu Uthman, on the authority of Ali
ibn Hanzalah that

H I G G IG % I 2

H m H G G 1/2

m
H I G G IG % I 2

C 1/2

. G
C G 2 G " Z G ! % G H G "

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
The privileged will enter the path of the adverse until the people say: He is so similar to
them that he must be one of them.' Then the privilege reaches him. And sometimes the
adverse enters the path of the privileged until the people says: He is so similar to them
that he must be one of them.' Then adversity reaches him. Verily, whoever Allah, the
388

Exalted, knows to be privileged, He will bring his life to an end with privilege, even if the
only time that remains tin the world is the hiccup of a she-camel.
5. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Yaqub ibn Yazid, on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on the
authority of Mansur ibn Hazim that:

qH Z G G G " Z % 2H G Z G % G
G " % G 2 % Z (c)

.Z % 2H G Z G " Z % G 2 Z qH G (R) G m G % %

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, created privileged and adversity before He created
His Creation. So whoever Allah knows to be privileged, Allah is never displeased with
Him at any time. Even if he does an evil deed, Allah is displeased with the act, but not
with him. If He knows someone to be adverse, Allah is displeased with Him at all times.
Even if he does a good deed, Allah is please with the act, but displeased with him for
what he will become. Thus, if Allah is pleased with something, then He never
displeased with it; and if He is displeased with something, He is never pleased with it.
6. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar and Sad ibn Abd Allah both said: Ayyub ibn Nuh said, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim that

H H H G G G7 G G2 G
G G G%G2 G ! 2 3

H G " G G 2 >

H G 2

. .G
! 2 3

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: And know that Allah intervenes between man and his heart.
He (AS) saie intervenes between man and the belief that falsehood is the
righteous." It is also said: "Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, intervenes between
man and his heart through death." Abu Abd Allah (AS) said: "Verily, Allah, the Blessed
and Exalted, brings people from adversity to privilege, but does not bring people for
privilege to adversity."

389

Chapter Fifty-Nine: Nafy al-Jabr wa-a-Tafwid The Negation of
Determinism and Relinquishment - 12 traditions

x
1. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Yaqub ibn Yazid, on the
authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Umar al-Yamani that

H I E 4 G % I G%G G G!" G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, created a creation, and knew they would proceed to
Him. He commanded them what to do and what not to do. However, He never
commands them to do anything until He has given them the ability do so; and He never
forbids them from doing anything until He gives them the means to refrain from doing
so. People never act or refrain from acting but with the permission of Allah, the Mighty
and High, i.e. with His Knowledge.
2. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman, on
the authority of Hafs ibn Qurt that

C G d ! 2 3

G G H G G Ga H G%G G

G GH G G G H H G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: The Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
Whoever claims that Allah, the Blessed, and Exalted, commands immorality and
indecency has attributed a lie to Allah. And whoever claims that good and evil take
place without the will of Allah, has removed Allah form His Rule. Whoever claims that
sins can take place without the power of Allah, has attributed a lie to Allah. And
whoever attributes lie to Allah, Allah will cast him into Hell. The meaning of good and
evil is health and illness It is due to the Word of the Mighty, and High: And We try you
by evil and good by way of probation.
3.Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sadabadi said, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al--Barqi, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the authority of more than one that
390

G C % G G G%G G H H H G " G G 2 G E} G

H G Y G G G G G

.

Abu Jafar al-Baqir and Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) both said:
"Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, is too Merciful towards His Creation then to compel
them to sin and then punish them for it. Allah is Mightier than intending a matter and
not being able to it." The reporter says: "They were both askes there another
position besides that of compulsion and free will?" They replied, "Yes, verily, and it is
broader than the space between heaven and earth."

4. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: al-Hasan ibn Mattil said, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hakam, on the Hisham
ibn Salim, that

_ G o

! 2 3 : G G2 G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is more Honorable than obliging people to do what they
do not have the strength to do. And Allah is Mightier than allowing something to exist
in His Rule that He does not intend.
5. Ali ibn Abd Allah al-Warraq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Jafar ibn Buttah said: Muhammad
ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar, Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Mahbub and Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn
Abd al-Aziz all three said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the
authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa al-Juhani, on the
authority of Hariz ibn Abd Allah that

H H H H E% G G G7
H H G " : G G 2 G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Verily, on the subject of free will, there are three types of persons. One person claims
that Allah, the Mighty and High, has compelled people to sin. He is an unbeliever who
has insulted the judgment of Allah. The second person claims that Allah has
relinquished all mattes. He is an unbeliever as well, as he has insulted the rule of Allah.
The third person claims that Allah only obliges His Servants to do what they have the
391

strength to do, and does not oblige them to do what they do not have the strength to
do. This is the correct Muslim: he who praises Allah when he does good and repents to
Allah when he commits a sin.
6. Ali ibn Abd Allah al-Warraq (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah, said, on the authority of Ismail
ibn Sahl, on the authority of Uthman ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ajlan that

2G d L G I G" _ m G o
G 2G G!" H G G2 GG L :
.m H E G Z 2 G G G IG
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (ASas Allah relinquished the affairs to the
servants?" He (AS) replied, "allah is more Honorable than to relinquish matter to them."
I asked, "Then has Allah compelled His Servant to disobey in their actions?"
He answered, "Allah is for too Just to compel His Servant to sin, and then punish him
for doing so."
7. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid said, on
the authority of his father, on the authority of Sulayman in Jafar al-Jafari that

E 2 G m E o
G 3

G (R)G H H H G " G L G " 33/4

G G%G G 2G O G G (R) G% G I H G

G " G I G%G G G O G G " Z G Y I G Z I
. % G G 2 m H G%G I G H

Determinism and relinquishment were mentioned in the presence of Abu al-Hasan alRida (AS). Hence, he (AS) said: "Shall I not give you an argument that will enable you to
destroy the arguments of anyone who debates with you?" We replied, "Only if you think
it is proper." He (AS) replied, Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, does not compel
anyone to obey or disobey. He does not neglect His Servants in His Sovereignty. He is
the Master over Everything they Possess, and He is All-Powerful over their actins. If
they decide to obey Allah, He will not prevent them or obstruct them. If they decide to
disobey Allah, and He wishes to prevent them form doing so, He will do so. However, if
He does not prevent them from disobeying, and they disobey, He has not compelled
them to do so. He (AS) then added, "whosoever masters this argument will defeat his
opponent."
8. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said, on the authority of Khunays ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Yahya al-Khazzaz, on the authority of al-Mufaddal ibn Umar that
392

G L G G G : G G2 G

G 2 m G G 3 % G% % I E G % E

. G G G % 3 G H L %

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"There is no determinism and thee is no relinquishment. Rather, the decree is between
the two." The reporter says: I asked, "What is the decree between the two?"
He (AS) replied, "The example of that is of a man who was about to commit a sin. You
saw him, and you told him not to do it. However, he did not stop. Then you left him, and
he committed the sin. You abandoned him to his sin because he did not heed your
warning. This does not mean that you encouraged him to sin."
9. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Muaddab (RA) said: Ahmad ibn Ali al-Ansari said, on
the authority of ~Abd al-Salam ibn Salih al-Hirawi that

Z I % 2 G H G G G m }

I H G " E Y C q G 3 IG I _ I H G " Z Y

_ ! 2 3

. # G G G 3

Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Musa ibn Jafar (AS) said:
Do not give charity or accept the testimony of someone who believes in determinism.
Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, does not burden not burden a soul with more
than it can bear. No bearer of a burden shall bear the burden of another.
10. Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Masrur (RA) said: al-Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Amir said, on
the authority of Mualla ibn Muhammad al-Basri, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ali alWashsha' that

d L G G C G 2G G!" H % L % d : _ G G
G G 3 G ! $ H H H G G Ga
. G I GH G H G Ga L G _G G 3 _ G ! L

Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (AS) said: I asked him, "Has Allah relinquished matters to the
servants?" He (AS) replied, "Allah is Mightier than that." I asked, "Then has He
compelled them to sins?" He (AS) answered, "Allah is more Just and better Judge than
that." He then added, "Allah, the Mighty and High, has said: O son of Adam, I am
worthier of your good deeds than yourself, and you are worthier of your bad deeds than
Me. You committed sins by means of My Power.'

393

11. My father (RA) said: Ahmad in Idris said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad that
Abu Abd Allah al-Razi said, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn al-Husayn al-Lu'lu'I, on the
authority of Ibn Sinan, on the authority of Mahzam that

G G H G G7 L G G L H G%G

G I G I G" H L G G I I Ga 2G L

.> }
G%G H Z G 3 H q 4 C d L G G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) asked, "Tell me what our followers disagree upon with
those you oppose?" I replied, "In determinism and relinquishment." He (AS) said: "then
ask me." I enquired, "Has Allah compelled His Servants to sin?" He (AS) answered,
"Allah is more Subduer than that for them" I asked, "Did He then give them complete
free will?" He (AS) replied, "Allah is more Powerful over them than that." I questioned,
"May Allah be in peace with you! Where does the truth lie?" He (AS) turned his hand
over twice or thrice then responded, "If I answered that question, you would surely
disbelieve."
12. Ahmad ibn Harun al-Fami (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abd Allah ibn Jafar al-Himyari said,
on the authority of his father that Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of Ali ibn Mabad,
on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Khalid that

G%G H G G G!" 2

H H G " G G % L : _
L G GH G2 G G~G E G G H G O G O$ G G7 G2 G G G G
G G L G G7 _ G H G L G GH
2 G G G%G H G O G c$

m I H G" % L Z H G m
G H G " G G7 _ G H

Z G G m I H G" Gc$ G H G" Z G G m G

G I G G%G H G H G I G H G"

G H G G%G H G7 H 2 H G" E G

o
I I o

G " G I G" G " G I G" G 2 H H I G 2
394

.Z G Y Z G I G H G H G

I asked Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS):
"O son of the Messenger of Allah! People claim that we believe in anthropomorphism
and determinism on the basis of the traditions transmitted from your forefathers (AS)."
Consequently, he (AS) said: "O son of Khalid! Are there more traditions about
anthropomorphism and determinism related from my forefathers the Imam (AS) or are
there more traditions about anthropomorphism and determinism related from the
Prophet?"
I answered, "Truly, there are far more transmitted from the Prophet (SA)."
He (AS) sainstead of accusing the Imams), they should accuse the Messenger of
Allah (SA) of believing in anthropomorphism and determinism."
I asked him, "They claim: Verily, the Messenger of Allah (SA) never said anything on
the subject; rather, what has been transmitted has been falsely attributed to him."
He responded, "Then they should say the same thing about my forefathers (AS): They
never spoke on the subject; rather, what has been transmitted has been falsely
attributed to them."
He then added,
Whoever believes in anthropomorphism and determinism is an unbeliever and an
infidel. We disown them in this world and the Hereafter. O son of Khalid! Verily, the
traditions concerning anthropomorphism and determinism have been fabricated in our
name by the exaggerators [ghali], who belittle the greatness of Allah. Therefore,
whoever likes them dislikes us, and whoever dislikes them, likes us. Whoever befriends
them shuns us, and whoever shuns them befriends us. Whoever strengthens ties with
them servers ties with us, and whoever (severs) shuns ties with them strengthens ties
with us. Whoever is harsh with them is kind to us, and whoever is kind to them is harsh
with us. Whoever honors them has insulted us, and whoever insults them has honored
us. Whoever accepted them has rejected us, and whoever rejects them has accepted
us. Whoever is good to them is mean to us, and whoever is mean to them is good to us.
Whoever verifies them belies us, and whoever belies them, verifies us. Whoever
bestows anything upon them, has refused to bestow it to us. O son of Khalid! Whoever
is our Shiite, then he should not take them to be his fiend or helper.

395

Chapter Sixty: Al-Qada' wa-al-Qadar wa-al-Fitnah wa-al-Arzaq qa-alAsar wa-al-Ajal. Predestination, Divine Decree, Trials, Means of
Sustenance Rates, and Restricted Powers - 36 traditions

1. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Yaqub ibn Yazid said, on the authority of Ibn
Abu Umayr, on the authority of Jamil ibn Durraj, o the authority of Zurarah, on the authority of
Abd Allah ibn Sulayman that

. m G G7 G G G G G H G " m % G G G2 G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"Verily, predestination, and the Divine Decree are creations from the creation of Allah.
Allah increases for the creation whatever He wills."
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Ali ibn Mabad, on the
authority of Durust, on the authority of Udhaynah that

G " ! 2 3 H G " G G G7 G L G % L : G G2 G
. G I H I d m G I G" G I H I d G G 2G
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "May I be your ransom! What is your belief
regarding predestination, and the Divine Decree?"
He (AS) replied, "I believe: Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, will gather all of His
Servants on the Day of Judgment. He will ask them about what He assigned them, and
not what was predestined for them."
3. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa said, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Khalid al-barqi, on the authority of Abd al-Malik ibn Antarah alShaybani, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather who said

G G G~G GG G GG G G G!"

C G G G G~G GG G % G 1/2
GO ~G(R) L G " H GG G G G G~G GG G % H 3 G

H % G G 2 G 2G L G 2G G 2 G 2G G G L G~G
396

G _ GG G G 2G G 2 G 2G G G L

Y ! GH G G GG G % *

E GO ~G" G H G G7 2 G % 2 G 2 Y Y

% 3d G G %3d G G G

A man came to the Commander of the Faithful (AS) and said: "O Commander of the
Faithful, tell me about the Divine Decree."
He (AS) replied, "It is a deep ocean, so do not enter it."
The man said: "O Commander of the Faithful, tell me about the Divine Decree."
The Imam (AS) answered, "It is a dark path, so do not follow it."
The man said: "O Commander of the Faithful, tell me about the Divine Decree."
The Imam (AS) answered, "It is a secret of Allah. Do not enquire about it."
He said: "O Commander of the Faithful, tell me about the Divine Decree."
The Imam (AS) asked, "Since you refuse to stop questioning me, I shall question you.
Tell me: Does the Mercy of Allah towards His Servants precede or succeed the actions
of His Servants?"
The man replied to him, "Allah's Mercy towards His Servants existed prior to the
actions of His Servants."
The Commander of the Faithful (AS) said: "All of you stand up and greet your brother,
for he has submitted to Islam, while only shortly before he was an unbeliever."
The reporter says: The man moved off, but not far. Then he returned and asked, "O
Commander of the Faithful! Do we stand and sit, and apprehend the delight, with the
First Will?"
The Commander of the Faithful (AS) replied to him, "Verily, you are far from the Divine
Will. Beware! I will ask you concerning three matters from which Allah will not give you
a place of escape. Tell me: Did Allah create the servants the way He willed or the way
they did?"
Consequently, he replied, "the way He willed."
The Imam (AS) asked, "Did Allah create the servants for what He willed or for what they
willed?"
He answered, "For what He willed."
Then (The) Ali (AS) asked, "Will they appear before Him on the Day of Judgment the
way He wills or the way they will?"
The man replied, "They will come to Him on the Day of Judgment the way He wills.
The Imam (AS) said: "Stand up, as you do not have any belief in the Divine Will."
4. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of al-Qasim ibn Muhammad
al-Isbahani, on the authority of Sulayman ibn Dawud al-Minqari, on the authority of Sufyan ibn
Uyaynah, on the authority of al-Zuhri that

397

G m E G G G G G _ G G

E G G C 3 E G G

G%G G G IG G G I H G H G G G G E G

G H G G H G " H G G H G G2G G

E 2 G H H G (R) G IG *

G 2 G E G 2 G

G!" L H G%G G q 3 G G " q G IG *
d G%G2 G7 G H G % Z

. % G % G G G G G O
A man asked Ali ibn al-Husayn (AS): "May Allah make me your ransom! Does Allah
punish people due to the Divine Decree or due to their actions?"
He (AS) replied,
Verily, the Divine Decree and actions are like the spirit and the body. The spirit, within a
body, cannot be sensed. The body, without a spirit, is shape without movement. When
they combine they become strong and proper. The Divine Decree operates in a similar
fashion.
If the Divine Decree did not act, then the Creator would not be differentiated from the
created, and the Divine Decree would not be sensed. If action took place without the
Divine Decree, then it would not be proper, and would be incomplete. Their strength is
in their combination. And Allah is the (Sole Source of) Help for His Pious Servants.
He (AS) then added,
Beware! Verily, the greatest oppressor of people is he who views his oppression as
justice, and sees the justice of the rightly-guided as oppression. Beware! Verily, the
greatest oppressor of people is he who views his oppression as justice, and sees the
justice of the rightly-guide as oppression. Beware! Verily, a servant as four eyes: two
eyes with which he sees the affairs of the Hereafter, and the two eyes with which he
sees the affairs of this world. When Allah, the Mighty and High, intends good for a
servant, he opens the two eyes of his heart, and he sees his shortcomings. When He
intends other than that for him, He leaves the heart (of His Servant as it is), with all it
contains.
He (AS) then turned to the person who had asked about the Divine Decree, and said:
"This is from that and this is from that."
5. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said: Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakariyya al-Qittan said: Bakr ibn
Abd Allah ibn Hubayb said: Ali ibn Ziyad said: Marwan ibn Muawiyah said, on the authority
of al-Amash, on the authority of Abu Hayyan al-Taymi, on the authority of his father who was
with Ali (AS) in the Battle of Siffin and onwards, that

398

G _ G qG O 2_ m EqG G C G : G G _ G E G

G ^Z C d3 % 3

m HG(R) GG G G G%G G G % _
G H G O G G G G % H E d % H G" L G

G7 H G % G O % H G "

G H G Z G G G x G
2 G
G " G % 2G m % H %

G m G O G% m E G
.
E Z Z I Z I G G!" G G G q H

While Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) was charging the battalions, Muawiyah came riding a
horse towards him. Ali was on the horse of the Messenger of Allah (SA) called alMurtajiz. He had the spear of the Messenger of Allah (SA) in his hand, and his own
sword called Dhu al-Fiqar was hanging on his side. One of his companions said "Be
careful, O Commander of the Faithful! Verily, we fear that this cursed man may kill you."
Consequently, he (AS) replied,
Verily, if you had said that he is the most unfaithful and the most hard-hearted. He is
the most wretched of the Kharijites due to his opposition to the rightly-guided Imams.
Nonetheless, death is sufficient as a guardian. Everyone is protected by angels. They
protect people fro falling into a well or a wall falling on them. They prevent people from
other evils that may befall them. When the moment of death arrives, these angels guard
people from what they are about to experience. I am the same. My death will come at
the hands of the most wretched person of this Ummah, and my blood will color this and
this. And he indicated his beard and head, saying it was "a well-know covenant and a
true promise."
The Compiler of this book says: The tradition is detailed; we have extracted from it the
required passage. I have transmitted all of it in the book Al-Dalal wa al-Mujizat.
6. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) both said: Muhammad
ibn Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris both said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad
ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ashari, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Ali
ibn Mabad, on the authority of Umar ibn Udhaynah, on the authority of Zurarah that

G " G Y G C H G H H G G G _ G H m G G2 L G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) saivery bounty begins with Allah, the Mighty and
High, who has bestowed it upon you. Every evil which befalls you is from yourselves,
although the Divine Decrees flows in it."
399

7. My father (RA) said: Ahmad ibn Idris said: Muhammad ibn Ahmad said, on the authority of
Yusuf ibn al-Harith, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Arzami, on the
authority of his father Abd al-Rahman who eliminated the chain of transmission to the person
who said

H 2 G H m G L G

G G >

I heard the Messenger of Allah (SA) say: "Allah decreed the destinies fifty thousand
years before He created the heavens and the earth."
8. Ali ibn Abd al-Warraq and Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hasan known to be Ibn Maqbarah alQazwini both said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: al-Haytham ibn Abu Masruq al-Nahdi said, on the
authority of al-Husayn ibn Ulwan, on the authority of Amr ibn Thabit, on the authority of Sad
ibn Tarif, on the authority of al-Asbagh ibn Nabatah that

C G GG G % G #$
GE O G!" E G O GE O G G G GG G H G "

.. H G G G!" G G G

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) moved from a wall that was tilted to another wall
so it was said to him, "O Commander of the Faithful! Are you fleeing from the destiny of
Allah?" He (AS) replied, "I am fleeing from the destiny of Allah to the Divine Decree of
Allah, the Mighty and High."
9. Abu al-Hasan Muhammad ibn Amr ibn Ali al-Basri said: Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn al-Hasan alMuthanna said: Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Mihraway al-Qazwini said: Abu Ahmad al-Ghazi said:
Ali ibn Musa al-Rida related to me that My father Musa ibn Jafar said: My father Jafar ibn
Muhammad said: My father Muhammad ibn Ali said: My father Ali ibn al-Husayn said: My
father al-Husayn ibn Ali (AS) said

G O }
G O G O

E G m EqG G H G G L G

G O H G%G G G G GG G G G OGG H H G G dG2
G G G G G G dG L Ga H G%G G G G G G G G G G G G OGG

.I q G m H G%G G G G G G G G

I heard my father Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) say:
Actions have three states: obligations, merits, and sins. As for obligations, the form
part of the command of Allah, the Mighty and High, His Pleasure, His destiny, His
Decree, His Will and His Knowledge. As for merits, the do not form part of the command
of Allah; rather, they form part of His Pleasure, His Destiny, His Divine Decree, His Will,
and His Knowledge. As for sins, they do not form part of the command of Allah; rather,
they form part of His Destiny, His Divine Decree, His Will, and His Knowledge. Hence,
he will punish people because of them.
The Compiler of this book says: With regards to sins, the predestination of Allah, the Mighty
and High, resides in His Order regarding them. With regards to sins, His Will resides in His
400

Prohibition of them. With regards to sins, His Divine Decree resides in His Knowledge of their
measures and their extents.
10. And with the same chain of transmission that

G%G G H G " H % C G G G G H G " I I C

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) said:
With the exception of the centers of knowledge, the world is nothing but ignorance. The
knowledge in its entirety is evidence against the ones who know and fail to practice. If
they practice what they know for the sake of showing off, they shall be held
accountable. They shall not be held accountable for what they practiced with sincerity.
The path of sincerity is a dangerous one. Hence, the Servant of Allah should beware.
11. Al- Husayn ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad al-Muadab (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said,
on the authority of his father, on the authority fo Ali ibn Mabad, on the authority of al-Husayn
ibn Khalid, on the authority of Ali ibn Musa al-Rida, on the authority of his father Musa ibn
Jafar, on the authority of his father Jafar ibn Muhammad, on the authority of his father
Muhammad ibn Ali, on the authority of his father Ali ibn al-Husayn, on the authority of his
father al-Husayn ibn Ali, on the authority of his father Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) that

G Z IG" G G G G Gc G % H m G L G

. G G G G G G _ G7 G

I heard the Messenger of Allah (SA) saying, "Allah, Great be His Glory, says: Whoever
is displeased with My Destiny, and does not believe in My Decree, then he should
invoke a deity other than Me." The Messenger of Allah (SA) sain every affair
destined by Allah, there is goodness for the believer."
12. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Muhamad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ismail ibn Bazi, on the authority of Muhamad ibn Udhafir, on the authority of
his father that

H q % G G"G G G G7E > G : }

G G G _ G G " G

G (R) G G G G G G G!"

.

d3 3

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said:
While the Messenger of Allah (SA) was on one of his journeys, some riders met him,
401

and said: "Peace be upon you, O messenger of Allah." So, he turned to them and
asked, "Who are you?"
They answered, "We are believers."
He (SA) asked, "What is the nature of your belief?"
They replied, "Pleasure in the destiny of Allah, submission to the command of Allah,
and relinquishment to Allah (of all affairs)."
The Messenger of Allah (SA) responded, "You are learned and wise. You are almost as
wise as the prophets. If you are truthful, then do not build what you will not inhabit, do
not collect what you will not eat, and fear Allah to whom you shall return."
13. Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Said al-Hamdani said: Ali
ibn al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Fuddal said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Harun
ibn Muslim, on the authority of Thabit ibn Abu Safiyyah, on the authority of Sad al-Khaffaf, on
the authority of al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah that

H L L G " % G d3 G G 3 L G " E G GG G
. G Z q G G G%GO G E G L G "

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) said to a man,
"If you do not wish to obey your Creator, then do not eat of His Sustenance. And if you
support His Enemy (Satan), then leave His Realm. If you are dissatisfied with His
destiny and His Divine Decree, then find a Lord other than Him."
14. And with the same chain of transmission that

G ! 2 3 GG G
H > G Y G 3 L G H G

3 L
H 3 L G H G Z 3 GY 3 L G H G G qG 2 G

. n

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) said:
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, said to Musa (AS):
O Musa! Remember My Will concerning four things. First: Unless you can see that your
sins are forgiven, then do not look for faults in others. Secondly Unless you see my
Treasures finish, then do not grieve about your finances. Thirdly: Unless you can see
my Sovereignty coming to an end, then do not place your hope in other than Me. And
fourthly: Unless you see that Satan is dead, then do not feel safe form his deception.
15. And with the same chain of transmission on the authority of al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah that

402

C G G G H G (R) H GG G

G " G%G G G E G G #

% G 2

I G a
IG 3d I H G " % 3 GI G "

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) said: "Verily, concern about this world does not
increase one's gain, and that is a waste of effort. Verily, the arrival of the Hereafter does
not decrease for what it estimated in (that is) the achievement of the Return."
He composed this:
If in a stable rock in the ocean,
Hard and solid, gathered with smooth sides,
There is sustenance for a soul that Allah sees; it will split
From it and brings to him all that is in it.
Or if there was between the seven layers (of heavens) his junction
Allah will ease its elevation in the difficult ascent,
Until he takes that which is written for him in the guarded-tablet,
The soul finds sustenance; otherwise sustenance will seek it out.
The Compiler of this book says: Our sustenance includes everything which Allah, the Mighty
and High, has made for our benefits, and which He has made accessible to us. Our
sustenance does not extend to that which Allah, the Mighty and High, has made inaccessible
for us.
16. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Sulayman that

L G (R) G I G G H G " % G G G~G %
G G G2 G% H H _ G H H G (R) G G d
G " % Z 2 G " % H G G " G " I G G L G " G%

403

While Abu al-Hasan was circumambulating (the Kabah) a man asked him: Tell me
about the Generous.' He (AS) replied to him,
Verily, there are two ways to answer your question: If you are asking about the created,
then the generous person is one who gives what Allah, the Mighty and High, has made
obligatory on him while the miser is one who acts misery in what Allah has made
obligatory. However, if you are asking about the Creator, then He is the Generous
whether He grants or does not grant, because if He grants something to a servant, then
He has granted him something that is not his and if He does not grant, then He has
prohibited him what is not his.
17. Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Hasan ibn Jafar ibn Ubayd Allah
ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) said: My grandfather Yahya ibn
al-Hasan related tome that Yaqub ibn Yazid said: Ibn Abu Umayr and Abd Allah ibn alMughayrah both related to me, on the authority of Abu Hafs al-Asha, on the authority of Abu
Hamzah that

G G G% G (R) G% L 3H GG O G!" L I H L #

_ G U
C Z G Z 2G G! G H G G! H G G7

G G G%G G I G #

H G G C G G G G H 3 L % H G" L

L G H G L G%G !

. GO H G (R) > H L G%G m H H

Ali ibn al-Husayn (AS) said:
I went out until I ended up at this wall so I leant on it. All of a sudden a man wearing two
white garments was staring at me.
He asked me, "O Ali ibn al-Husayn! What is wrong? You seem sad and worried. Are
you concerned about worldly matters? If that is the case, then you should know that
Allah's sustenance continues in both good times and bad."
I replied, "I am not worried about his world. However, I am certainly sad as you said."
He enquired, "So, are you sad about the Hereafter? That is a true promise, in which the
Sovereign Subduer will judge."
I answered, "I am not worried about the Hereafter either. However, I am certainly sad as
you said."
He asked, "Then what are you sad about?"
I replied, "I am frightened of the mischief of the son of al-Zubayr."
He laughed and then said: "O Ali son of al-Husayn! Have you ever heard of someone
who feared Allah, the Exalted, and whom Allah did not save?"
I answered, "No."
He said: "O Ali son of al-Husayn! Have you ever heard of someone who asked
something of Allah, the Mighty and High, and Allah did not answer him?"
I said: "No."
He (AS) says: "I then looked, but there was no one in front of me."

404

18. Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA) said: My father said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa
said, on the authority of Abd al-Rahman ibn Abu Najran, on the authority of al-Mufaddal ibn
Salib, on the authority of Jabir ibn Yazid al-Jufi that

G G 2 E G G GH }

G G _ GZ Z G I G~ 3

.

Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (AS) said:
Verily, Musa son of Imran (AS) said: "O my Lord! I am pleased with what You have
decreed regarding removing the souls of the elderly and the souls of the young."
Allah, the Mighty and High, replied, "O Musa! Are you not pleased with Me for being
their Sustainer and Provider [kafil]?"
Musa replied, "Of course, O Lord! You are the Best Custodian and the Best of
Providers."
19. Hamzah ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Zayd ibn ali ibn alHusayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS); Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan and Muhammad ibn Ibrahim
ibn Ahmad al-Muadhi all three said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Said al-Hamdani freed slave
of the Hashimites said: Yahya ibn Ismail al-Jariri said reading (from his notes) that al-Husayn
ibn Ismail said: Amr ibn Jumay said that

2

% 2
G G d H %G G % H % G G % G G7
GG G > G G G G H GG G G G G L
G m

C G >

.
Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) said:
My father related to me, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his
grandfather that al-Husayn ibn Ali (AS) entered into the presence of Muawiyah, so he
asked the Imam (AS):
"What possessed your father to kill the people of Basra, and then wander the streets at
night wearing two undergarments?"
He (AS) replied, "He acted according to his knowledge, He knew that he could not avoid
what was destined for him. And he knew that what was not destined for him could not
harm him."
He responded, "You have spoken the truth."
When he intended to battle the Kharijites, the Commander of the Faithful was told:
"Take your precautions, O Commander of the Faithful!"
405

He (AS) composed:
Which of my two days shall I escape from death?
The day which is not decreed or the day which is decreed,
The day which is not decreed, I do not fear the return,
And the day which is decreed, there is no need in taking caution.
20. Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Abd Allah ibn Ahmad al-Isbahani said: Makki ibn Ahmad ibn
Sadaway al-BurdhI said: Abu Mansur Muhammad ibn al-Qasim ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Ataki
reported to us that Muhammad ibn Ashras said: Ibrahim ibn Nasr said: Wahab ibn Wahab ibn
Hashim Abu al-Bakhtari said: Jafar ibn Muhammad said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his grandfather, on the authority of Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) that

H 3 G Z G O3 G H G " C G : %H _ G H G EqG G G _ G

o

3 $ Z
G m

G C _ H G (R) G 3 Z HH 3
% *
H G7 H I _ G G G7 } H H H

qG G G G G I G C

n
G C H 2G G G q G G G _ G G H G G

G H $ G 2G $ _ G G $ G GG $
x2 G

.k

The Prophet (SA) said:
O Ali! It is certain that you will not please anyone over the anger of Allah. So, do not
praise anyone for what Allah has granted you, and do not blame anyone for what Allah
has not granted you. Verily, sustenance is not snatched away y the greed of a greedy
person not is it diverted by the hate of a spiteful person. Verily, through His Wisdom
and His Grace, Allah, the Mighty and High, placed refreshment and happiness in
certainty and pleasure. He placed anxiety and sorrow in doubt and anger. There is
nothing lower than ignorance, and there is no greater wealth than wisdom. There is no
solitude greater than narcissism, and there is no greater help than good advice. There
is nothing more intelligent than good management and there is nothing more pious
than abstaining from the forbidden. There is no greater independence than good
conduct, and there is no act of service greater than thinking. The calamity of speech is
lying. The calamity of knowledge is forgetfulness. The calamity of service is weakness.
The calamity of intelligence is arrogance. The calamity of bravery is injustice. The
calamity of magnanimity is favor. The calamity of beauty is vanity. The calamity of
nobility is pride.
21. Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA) said: My father said: Muhammad ibn Abu al-Suhban
said: Abu Ahmad Muhammad ibn Ziyad al-Azdi said, Aban al-Ahmar related to me that

406

G " Z G G G O L GdG % % H E H G }

G " G G G _ G H 3 ! 2 3

H H G G GL G " G

G n

Z >

A man came to al-Sadiq Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) and said: "May my father and
mother be your ransom! Admonish me with an exhortation."
So he (AS) said:
If Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is the Sustainer, then why do you worry? If
sustenance is allocated with fairness, then why are you greedy? If you will be held
accountable, then why do you save? If Allah, the mighty and High, is generous, then
why are you miserly? If the punishment from Allah, the Mighty and High, is the Hell,
then why do you sin? If death is true, then why are you happy? If all actions are fro
Allah, the Mighty and High, then why do you cheat? If Satan is your open enemy, then
why do you neglect (your duties)? If crossing the Bridge (al-Sirat) is true, then why are
you proud? If everything has been decreed, then why do you grieve? If the word is
perishable, then why are you attached to it?
22. Abu Mansur Ahmad ibn Ibrahim ibn Bakr al-Khuri said in Naysabur that Abu Ishaq Ibrahim
ibn Muhammad ibn Harun al-Khuri said: Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Ziyad the Jurist in al-Khuri
said: Ahmad ibn Abd Allah al-Juybari al-Shaybani said, on the authority of Ali ibn Musa alRida, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his forefathers, on the authority of Ali
(AS) that

. E x dG $ 2 G H H G H H H H G " G

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, had decreed and
planned everything two thousand years before He created Adam (AS)."
23. Abu Abd Allah al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ushnani al-Razi the Judge in Balkh said: Ali
ibn Mihrawayh al-Qazwini said: Ali ibn Musa al-Rida said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his forefathers, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) that

% m H % m H G G H H G~G EqG G H G

H Z % m G Z H G "G I G H H
407

H H G " % G " I C G I G 2G G G G G G

A Jewish man asked Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS): "Tell me what is not from Allah, what is not
for Allah, and what Allah does not know?" Thus, he (AS) replied, As for what Allah, the
Mighty and High, does not know that is your statement, O assembly of Jews, that
Uzayr is the son of Allah. Allah does not know of any sons for Himself. As for your
word, what is not for Allah, then associating partners with Allah is not for Allah. And as
for your word: what is not from Allah, then oppression is not from Allah. The Jewish
man said: I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah.
24. Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Yunus al-Laythi said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Said al-Hamdani freed slave of the Hashimites said: al-Harith ibn Abu Usamah reported to us
in reading, on the authority of al-Mada'ini, on the authority of all three Uwanah ibn al-Hakm;
Abd Allah ibn al-Abbas ibn Sahl al-Saidi and Abu Bakr al-Khurasani freed slave of the
Hashimites, on the authority of al-Harith ibn Hasirah, on the authority of Abd al-Rahman ibn
Jundab, on the authority of his father and others that

G H E G G m2 G E G G E G 3

C H G " % G G%G q G Y % G Y G%G _ Z E G G H E G H E

G G G G " H G Y I dH2 E G!" IG C E G
G G7 Z G H G " G G 3/4
G 2 >

2 G 2 m G

. G m 2 L G 3 L G G m ~G" E dG >

The people came to al-Hasan ibn Ali (AS) after the death of Ali (AS) to pay allegiance
to him. So he (AS) said: All praise is for Allah over what He destined in matter, specified
in merit, generalized in affair and glorified in well-being, a praise with which He
completes over us His bounties and we require His pleasure. Verily, this world is an
abode of tribulation and mischief. Everything that is init has a decline. Allah has
informed us of that so that we may take a lesson. Therefore He preceded with a threat
to us so that there is no evidence for us after warning. So be ascetic in what is to perish
and desirous in what is to remain. Fear Allah in privacy and in open. Verily, Ali (AS) in
life, death and the rising lived with a measure and died with the time. Verily, I shall
accept your allegiance on that you will make peace with whom I make peace with and
fight with whom I fight with.Thus, they all paid allegiance to him on that basis.
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn, the Compiler of this book says: The ajal is the death of a
human and the time of his death. And the ajal of his living is the time of his living. That is the
meaning of the word of Allah, the Mighty and High: So when their (appointed) time comes
they shall not delay it even an hour, nor shall they go before.
408

If a human dies a natural death on his bed or is killed then verily the ajal of his death is the
time of his death. It is possible that if a murdered person was not killed, he would have died in
that instance anyway. It is also possible that if he was not killed then he would have lived on.
The knowledge of that is unseen for us. Allah, the Mighty and High, has said; Say: Had you
remained in your houses, those for whom slaughter was ordained would certainly have
gone forth to the places where they would be slain. He has also said: Say: Flight shall
not do you any good if you fly from death or slaughter.
If a group of people are killed at the same time, it is possible to say that all of them died at
their time and eve if they wee not killed they would have died in that instance. For, it is
possible that a disease would have occurred in all of them and would have killed them all in
that instance. It is not possible to say that they all died without the time of their death.
As a whole, the ajal of a person is the time of his death that Allah, the Mighty and High, knows
that he will die in that hour or will be killed. The word of al-Hasan (AS) concerning his father
(AS) that "he lived with a measure and died with the time? Is a confirmation of what we have
said about this matter. Allah is the Granter of Direction to the correctness with His Favor.
25. Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab al-Sijzi said in Naysabur that Abu Nasr
Mansur ibn Abd Allah ibn Ibrahim al-Isbahani reported to us that Ali ibn Abd Allah said: alHasan ibn Ahmad al-Harrani said; Yahya ibn Abd Allah ibn al-Dahhak said, on the authority of
al-AwzaI, on the authority of Yahya ibn Abu Kathir that

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) was asked: "Shall we not guard you?"
He (AS) said: "The guardian of every man is his death."
26. Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab said: Mansur ibn Abd Allah said: Ali ibn
Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn Jafar said: Ishaq ibn Ibrahim said: Sharik said, on the
authority of Abu Ishaq, on the authority of Said ibn Wahab that

GG G H G%G2G G!" I G E G C H H Z _ G G E G G G H

H G G G7 E G % G%GO G
E 4 H Z L G GG G G
H E 2 G H H G%G A

H E G G7 m G%G G ^ H G % H G " E G % H G"
.% % H G (R) % G 3d
One night in the Battle of Siffin, we were with Said ibn Qays. The two army rows were
standing opposite each other until the Commander of the Faithful (AS) came. We came
down to his ground. Said ibn Qays asked him: "O Commander of the Faithful! Do you
not fear anything at this point?" He (AS) replied, And what should I fear? There is no
anyone except that with him are two angels assigned to him so that he does not fall into
a well or an animal does not hit him or he may not fall from a mountain until the decree
comes for him. When that which is decreed comes, they vacate from between him and
the decreed.
409

27. Abu Nasr Mansur Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Ibrahim ibn Tamim al-Sarkhasi said in
Sarkhas that Abu Lubayd Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shami said: Ibrahim ibn Said al-Jawhari
said: Abu Damrah Anas ibn Ayad said, on the authority of Abu Hazim, on the authority of
Amr ibn Shuayb, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather that

_ G G G G G H G G

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "None of you believe unless he also believes in the
Divine Decree, its good, its evil, its sweetness, and its bitterness."
28. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan
al-Ta'i said: Abu Said Sahl ibn Ziyad al-Adami al-Razi said, on the authority of Ali ibn Jafar
al-Kufi that I heard My Master Ali ibn Muhammad that Abu Jafar ibn Ali related to me, on the
authority of his father al-Rida Ali ibn Musa on the authority of his father Musa ibn Jafar, on
the authority his father Jafar ibn Muhammad, on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn
Ali, on the authority of his father Ali ibn al-Husayn, on the authority of his father al-Husayn
ibn Ali (AS); and Muhammad ibn Umar al-Hafiz al-Baghdadi said: Abu al-Qasim Ishaq ibn
Jafar al-Alawi related to me that Abu Jafar ibn Muhammad ibn Ali related to me, on the
authority of Sulayman ibn Muhammad al-Qarashi, on the authority of Ismail ibn Abu Ziyad alSakuni, on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad, on the authority of his father Ziyad alSakuni, on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad, on the authority of his father Muhammad ibn
Ali, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather, on the authority of Ali
(AS); the word is for Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq that

G GG G G G G G G
E G H G "E 2 Z 3 3 G GG G % E

Z Z Z C 3 H Z I GG G Gc q G G G

G G G G ! q G qG G G GG O
G E G G G O E OG
H H H G " IG G H G G GHG G H G G G 2 G 3 G G

>
G Z m Z G G G Z G 3 Z G 3

m

410

Z G Z G I 2 G L

Z G Z G" > 2 IG

% O

An Iraqi man entered the presence of the Commander of the Faithful (AS) and asked:
"Tell us about our attack on the Syrians. Is it part of Allah's Destiny and Divine
Decree?"
The Commander of the Faithful (AS) replied to him,
"By all means, O Shaykh! By Allah, all of you have not gone up a hill or gone down to
the depth of a valley except with the destiny from Allah and the decree."
The old man asked, "Will my trouble be accounted for before Allah, O Commander of
the Faithful?"
He (AS) answered,
Slowly, O Shaykh! Perhaps you think predestination is irrevocable, and the decree is
inseparable. If that were so, then the reward, the punishment, the commandment, the
prohibition, and the reprimand would all be annulled. The meaning of threatening and
promise would disintegrate. There would be no blame for the evil-doer, and no praise
for the good-doer. In fact, the good-doer would be worthier of blame than the sinner,
and the sinner would be worthier of praise than the good-doer. This is the claim of the
idol worshippers, the opponents of the Most Compassionate, the free-willers of this
Ummah, and its Zoroastrians.
O Shaykh! Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, has obliged with choice, forbidden with
warning, granted plenty for little, does not consider the one who was coerced to be a
sinner, does not require the subjected to obey, and has not created the heaves and the
earth and that which is between them without a purpose. This is the assumption of the
unbelievers. Woe to those who disbelieve in Hell.
The old man rose and composed:
You are the Imam in whose obedience we all hope,
To receive forgiveness from the Most Compassionate on the Day of Salvation;
You have made clear what was dubious to us from our religion.
May your Lord reward you with beneficence on your behalf!
Hence, there is no excuse for committing indecency,
Which I perpetrated with un-justice and disobedience,
No, no, I do not claim that the forbidder has dropped him
In it, because then I would be serving the Satan, O people,
Nor does He like or will the un-justice; nor
Killing the Guardian with oppression and enmity.
How can He like, while His will is correct.
The Possessor of the Empyrean that is Allah has declared this is a clear declaration.
The Compiler of this book says: Muhammad ibn Umar al-Hafiz has only mentioned the first
two couplets of this poetry at the end of this tradition.
This tradition is also said by Abu al-Husayn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Farisi alAza'imi that Abu Said Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Rumayh al-Nisawi said in Jurjan that Abd
al-Aziz ibn Ishaq ibn Jafar said in Baghdad that Abd al-Wahhab ibn Isa al-Marwazi related
411

to me that al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Muhammad al-Balawi said: Muhammad ibn Abd Allah ibn
Nujayh said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather (AS)
Also this tradition has been said by Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan that al-Hasan ibn ali alSukkari said; Muhammad ibn Zakariyya al-Jawhari said: al-Abbas ibn Bakkar al-Dabbi said:
Abu Bakr al-Hudhayli said, on the authority of Ikrimah, on the authority of Ibn Abbas that

G GG G G % G I H G _ G G GG G *

H G%G % H H G " Z % G G

o

GG G G IG H G " Z 3 Z G 2 G H GG
H C Z G " G G G HG" H G " 2 H C G G 3 H G G

.Z G " G G G HG" H G " 2

When the Commander of the Faithful (AS) moved on from the Battle of Siffin, an old
man stood up before him who had witnessed the incident with him and said:
"O Commander of the Faithful! Tell us about this journey of ours. Is it part of Allah's
Destiny, and His Divine Decree?"
He has mentioned the tradition similar to this, except that he has added in it: The old man
said:
"O Commander of the Faithful! What are the predestination ad the Divine Decree that
are contracted with us, and we have not gone down in a valley or gone up a hill except
with these two?"
The Commander of the Faithful (AS) replied, "The command and the judgment are from
Allah, then he read this verse: And your Lord has destined that you shall not sere (any)
but Him, and goodness to your parents, i.e. the command of your Lord is that you do
not serve any but Him and do good to your parents."
29. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah
al-Kufi said: Musa ibn Imran al-NakhaI said, on the authority of his paternal uncle al-Husayn
ibn Yazid al-Nawfali, on the authority of Ali ibn Salim that

HG H G " G G G I Z G G 3 aC G % d : G G2 G

G m

. E G E 4 H HG" .
2 m

I asked Abu Abd Allah (AS) whether charms, if they remove anything from the decreed.
He (AS) replied, "It is from the decreed. He (AS) then added, Verily, the Free-willers are
the Zorastrians of this Ummah, and they are the ones that intended to attribute Allah
with justice, but took Him out of His Rule. This verse has been revealed for them: On
412

the day when they shall be dragged upon their faces into the fire; taste the touch of
hell. Surely We have created everything according to a measure.
30. Abu al-Husayn Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Ishaq al-Farisi al-Aza'imi said:
Abu Said Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Rumayh al-Nisawi related to me that Abd al-Aziz ibn
Yahya al-Tamimi in Basra and Ahmad ibn Ibrahim ibn Mualla ibn Asad al-Ammi both said:
Muhammad ibn Zakariyya al-Ghalabi said: Ahmad ibn Isa ibn Zayd said: Abd Allah ibn Musa
ibn Abd Allah ibn Hasan said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his forefathers
that

% H EqG G G _ G G G G G%GO$ G%G E G G G2 G
G 2 H
GH G G E 4 H HG" H H m E G E 4 H HG" H H G G G

Al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) was asked about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: Surely We have created everything according to a measure.
He (AS) replied, "Verily, the Mighty and High, has said: We have created everything
according to a measure for the dwellers of hell according to their deeds."
31. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn al-Hasan al-Kufi said, on the authority of his father al-Hasan
ibn Ali ibn Abd Allah al-Kufi, on the authority of his grandfather Abd Allah ibn al-Mughayrah,
on the authority of Ismail ibn Muslim that

H G H H G G G _
G H G G H G % H E G G G G "

Al-Sadiq (AS) was asked about the prayer behind one who denies the decree of Allah,
the Mighty and High. He (AS) said: "Then he should repeat all the prayers he has
prayed behind him,"
32. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sadabadi said:
Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Sinan, on the authority of Ziyad ibn al-Mundhar, on the authority of Sad ibn
Tarif, on the authority of al-Asbagh ibn Nubatah that

_ G G G H G " G G

% G%G G 2G G G G G7 G G G 3 G G G G G

G H G C G G G H G H G G G H G HH G G G % I H G G IG 2 G IG 3 I

% H G GH G G HG G

413

m Z H m G G >

G G" I G" G H Gx2

G G H I d G G Eq G G

The Commander of the Faithful (AS) said the following concerning the decree:
Beware that the decree is a secret from the secrets of Allah, concealment from the
concealments of Allah, and a sanctuary from the sanctuaries of Allah. It is raised to the
covering of Allah, folded up from the creation of Allah, sealed with the seal of Allah, and
precedent in the knowledge of Allah.
Allah has taken of its knowledge from the servants, raised it above their witnessing and
level of intellect because they cannot attain it with the reality of the Lordship or the
power of the Needless. Neither can they attain the greatness of the Light, nor the honor
of the solitary, because it is an overflowing ocean purely for Allah, the Exalted.
Its depth is between the heaven and the earth, and its width is between the east and the
West. It is as dark as the pitch- dark night, full of snakes and fishes. It rises at one time
ad drops at another. In its bottom, the sun shines. It ought to be that no one has its
information except Allah the One, the Peerless. Thus, whoever becomes informed of I
becomes contrary to Allah, the Mighty and High in His Judgement and contest Him in
His Rule. He uncovers His Concealment and secret, and buys the anger of Allah. His
abode is Hell, and it is the worst place of arrival.
The Compiler of this book says, we believe: Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has
predestined and decreed the good and evil of His Servants, and all that is in the universe. The
decree can be in the meaning of information, like Allah, the Mighty and High says: And We
had decreed to the children of Israel in the Book. He means that We made known to them.
Like Allah, the Mighty and High, says: And We revealed to him this decree, that the roots
of these shall be cut off in the morning. He means that We informed him and made it
known to him. Therefore, it cannot be refused that Allah the Mighty and High, decrees the
actions of the servants and all that which is of good and evil in this meaning, because Allah,
the Mighty and High, is the Knower of it all.
It is correct that He may give knowledge to any of His servants and inform them of it. The
decree can also be in the meaning of writing and informing, like Allah, the Mighty and High,
says: Except his wife; We decreed that she shall surely be of those who remain behind;
i.e. We prescribed and informed. Al-Ajjaj said:
Be informed that the Glorified has decree
In the earlier scriptures that He wrote.
He decreed' means He wrote.
The decree can sometimes be in the meaning of the rule and necessity. Allah, the Mighty and
High, says: And your Lord has destined that you shall not serve (any) but Him, and
goodness to your parents. He means that He has ordained that and made it necessary on
His Creation. It may also be possible to say that Allah, the Mighty and High, has destined the
actions of the servants in this meaning. What He made necessary for His Servants and
ordered them to do are obligations.
It is also possible that the meaning is: Allah has set a measurement for the actions of the
servants to explain its measurements and states of good and evil, obligatory and
supererogatory, and other things. He gives reasons fro what makes the states of these actions
recognized.
414

Therefore, the Mighty and High is the One that sets the measurements, but to explain them to
other than Himself who do not know the state of what He has destined in their measurements.
This is apparent and not hidden. It is very clear that it does not require any proofs over it. Is it
not so that when we go to the skilled people in measurements, their knowledge of
measurements does not stop them from setting measurements to explain to us their
measurements?
Verily, we reject that Allah, the Mighty and High, has ordained His Servants with this and
forbidden them from abstention from this. Or that He has done it and created it. As Allah, the
Mighty and High, has created them a measured creation, so we do not reject that.
I heard some learned ones says: Verily, the destiny [al-Qada'] has ten different meanings: The
first of them is to know' according to the Word of Alah, the Mighty and High: But (it was only)
a desire in the soul of Yaqub which he destined, i.e. He knew.
The second meaning is to inform' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: And We had
decreed to the children of Israel in the Book, and the Word of the Mighty and High: And
We revealed to him this decree, i.e. We informed him.
The third is to judge' according to the Word of the Mighty and High is: And Allah decrees
with the truth, i.e. He judges with the truth.
The fourth meaning is to say' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: And Allah
decrees with the truth, i.e. He says the truth.
The firth is to determine definitely' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: But when
We decreed death for him, i.e. We determined definitely. So I is the definite decree.
The sixth is to command' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: And your Lord has
destined that you shall not serve (any) but Him, i.e. your Lord has commanded.
The seventh is to create' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: So He decreed them
seven heavens in two periods, i.e. he created them.
The eight is to do' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: Therefore, decree what
you are going to decree, i.e. do what you are doing.
The ninth is to accomplish' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: So when Musa
had decreed the term; and the Word of the Mighty and High, accounting Musa Whichever of
the two terms I decree, there shall be no wrongdoing to me; and Allah is a witness of
what we say, i.e. I accomplish.
The tenth is to conclude from something' according to the Word of the Mighty and High The
matter is decreed concerning which you enquired, i.e. it is concluded from it for you two. It
is the Word of a person what I have decreed your requirement for you, i.e. I have concluded it
for you.
Therefore, it is possible to say that the things in their entirety are with the destiny of Allah and
His Decree, Blessed and Exalted be He. This is in the meaning that Allah, the Mighty and
High, knows it and know it measures, and that He has a judgment for all of it, either the good
or evil.
Therefore, whatever is good He decreed it in the meaning that He commanded it, determined
it definitely, and made it true. He knew its extent and measure. Whatever is evil, He did not
command it, and is not pleased with it. However, He destined it, and decreed it in the sense
that He knows its measure and extent, and has judged according to His Judgement.
The word [al-fitnah] has ten different meanings: One of them is misguidance.'
The second is to put to the test' according to the Word of Allah: And We tried you with (a
severe) trying, i.e. We have put you to a test; and the Word of the Mighty and High: Do men
think that they will be left alone on saying, We believe, and not be tried? i.e. they will not
be put to a test.
The third is to make excuse' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: Then their
excuse would be nothing but that they would say: By Allah, our Lord, we were not
polytheists.
415

The fourth is to believe in polytheism' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: And
polytheism is severer than murder.
The fifth is to disbelieve' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: Surely into trial have
they already tumbled down, i.e. into disbelief.
The sixth is to burn with fire' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: Surely (as for)
those who persecute the believing men and the believing women, i.e. they burn.
The seventh is to punish' according the Word of the Mighty and High: (It is) the day on
which they shall be tried at the fire, i.e. they shall be punished. The Word of the Mighty and
High: Taste your trial! This is what you would hasten on, i.e. your punishment. And the
Word of the Mighty and High: And as for him whose trial Allah desired, you cannot
control anything fro him with Allah, i.e. whose punishment.
The eight is to kill' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: If you fear that hose who
disbelieve will cause you distress, i.e. if you fear that they will kill you. Also the Word of the
Mighty and High: But none believed in Musa except the offspring of his people, on
account of the fear of Firawn and their chiefs, lest he should persecute them, i.e. he
may kill them.
The ninth is to turn away' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: And surely they
had purposed to try you in that which We have revealed to you, i.e. to turn you away.
The tenth is a severe trial' according to the Word of the Mighty and High: Our Lord! Do not
make us a trial for those who disbelieve. And the Word of the Mighty and High is: Our
Lord! Make us not subject to the persecution of the unjust people, i.e. a severe trial with
which they may cause mischief.
They say about themselves: Nothing has killed them except the fact that their religion is void,
and our religion is true. Therefore, it invites them to Hell due to their disbelief and oppression.
Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim has added to these ten meanings another possibility that one of
the meanings of the word fitnah is love according to the Word of the Mighty and High: And
know that your property and your children are a temptation, i.e. love. In my opinion, there are
ten meanings to this verse. Fitnah is this context means a severe trial' and not love.
The confirmation of that is the tradition of the Prophet (SA), "The son, takes after the father in
ignorance, trial and miserliness."
I have extracted this tradition with transmission in the book Maqtal al-Husayn ibn Ali,
blessings be upon them both.
33. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamdani (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Ghiyath ibn Ibrahim, on the authority of Jafar ibn
Muhammad, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather (AS) that

G G G G H : G _ G%G E H }

G d n

3 G

G I L H G G G G I G"

G G G G G " % G G " % H G G!"

Z I G G! G E G 2G H H G L 3 G3 H G (R) Z G >

416

The Messenger of Allah (SA) passed by some hoarders. He ordered them to take the
goods they were hoarding to the market, so that hey could be seen. It was said to the
Messenger of Allah (SA), "It would be better if you had fixed a price on them." He (SA)
became so angry that it became apparent on his face, He saishould fix prices?
Verily, the price is with Allah, the Mighty and High. He may raise it if He wills, and He
may drop it if He wills."
It was said to the Messenger of Allah (SA), "If you had fixed prices for us (it would be
better), because the prices rise and drop."
He (SA) replied, "I would never meet Allah, the Mighty and High, with an innovation
which was not revealed to me. Leave the servants of Allah, so that some of them may
eat from the others."
34. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ayyub ibn Nuh, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr,
on the authority of Abu Hamzah al-Thumali that

_ G H ! 2 3
o
H G " : G G _ G
G C G !C G G dG _ Z G

% .G% I G " G% I G " G%GO G H G

C G H G% H % H G H G "

.n
G 3
Ali ibn al-Husayn (AS) said: "Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has assigned an
angel to regulate prices, who manages them with His Command." Abu Hamzah alThumali sys: Charging high prices was mentioned to Ali ibn al-Husayn (SA) so he said:
"I do not have the right to raise prices. However, whoever raises or lowers prices will
have to answer for that."
The Compiler of this book says: Charging high prices is increasing the prices of things so
much so that the thing is sold for more than what it would be sold for in that place. Lowering
prices means to decrease the price. Therefore, whether the low or high prices are due to
excess or shortage of commodities, it is from Allah, the Mighty and High, and it is obligatory for
people to accept the prices and to be satisfied with them. If the high or low prices are caused
by hoarding when there ws no shortage or excess of commodities, without the approval of the
people, or because one person purchased all the food in the town in order to raise the price of
food, then he is a price-fixer like Hakim ibn Hizam who used to buy all the food that entered
Medina. The Prophet (SA) passed by him and said: "O Hakim ibn Hizam! Beware of hoarding."
35. My father (RA) said with it that Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Yaqub ibn
Yazid, on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Salmah al-Hannat, that

417

G H G G G%G m *

G G G " m H G H

m

H m *
. G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: Whenever there is food in a town other than what
one person has bought then it is permissible for him to hold on to the excess of
commodity. If there is sufficient food available for people in the city, then the price will
not rise merely because one person purchases the excess. Verily, the price only rises if
one person buys all the food that enters the city.
36. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of both Ahmad and Abd
Allah sons of Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the
authority of Hammad ibn Uthman, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Ali al-Halabi that

Z G n

G G %H G G 2 G _ G E G G G G 2
. G G G G 3 d *

G *
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked about boarding so he replied,
Verily, hoarding is buying the only food available in town and then hoarding it.
However, if there is food or merchandise other than it, then there is no problem in
owning any excess commodity. If there was a rise in price in such a circumstance form
Allah, the Mighty and High, then the buyer of all the food of the town does not deserve
blame, because Allah, the Mighty and High, does not blame a servant over his action.
This is why the Messenger of Allah (SA) has said: The importer is blessed and the
hoarder is cursed.' If it is from the Mighty and High, then it is obligatory to be satisfied
with it and accept it. Similarly it is obligatory when it is due to shortage of things or
shortage of income, because that is from Allah, the Mighty and High. What is from
Allah, the Mighty and High, or is from the people, is from previous in the knowledge of
Allah, Exalted be His remembrance. Like the creating of the creation and that is with His
Destiny and His Decree, as I have explained in the meaning of the Predestination and
the Divine Decree.

418

Chapter Sixty-One: Al-Atfal wa-Adl Allah, Fihim Children and Allah's
Justice Concerning Them - 13 traditions

1. Al-Husayn ibn Yahya ibn Durays al-Bajali said: My father said: Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn
Imran al-Sukkari al-Siryani said: Ibrahim ibn Asim said in Qazwin that Abd Allah ibn Harun
al-Karkhi said: Abu Jafar Ahmad ibn Abd Allah ibn Yazid ibn Sallam ibn Ubayd Allah said:
Abu Abd Allah ibn ibn Yazid related to me that Abu Yazid ibn Sallam related to me, on the
authority of his father Sallam ibn Ubayd Allah, on the authority Abd Allah ibn Sallam freed
slave of the Messenger of Allah (SA) that

G G d L G E H G Z H H _ m G~G L G L d

G " % H G" G IG ! ! 2 3 G H G 7

G C Gc G " GG I G G G dG G d G G G
I G G Z G 3 Z L G H L Z L H H I H

H H I H H G " G % G 2H Z

[% ] E dG 3 G " Gc G " GG
H G Z G I G G k

Z H I G7 E 4 C I m Z H

H G 3 IG Y G H G G Z Y GG O G G7 3 H H d
G 3

G 3 2 G 3
G 2 3 C

G m I
G G G7 % 2 GH G 3 G7 I Y G G ! 2 3 d H G G
% 2 G G" L Z Z G% L IG % Y Z G

% G H ! 2 3 d % Y G Z G

G I G H % G H I O G Z 2 3 IG G

G G .

G I G IG I GH G x

419

>

I asked the Messenger of Allah (SA): "Tell me: Will Allah, the Mighty and High, punish
His Creation without evidence?"
He (SA) replied, "Allah forbid."
I asked, "Then, do the children of monotheists go to Heaven or Hell?
Hence, he (SA) replied,
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is more adequate for them. When the Day of Judgment
comes and Allah, the Mighty and High, assembles creation to deliver His Judgment. He
will bring forth the children of the monotheists, and will ask them:
"O My Servants! Who is your Lord? What is your religion? And what deeds have you
brought forth?"
They will reply:
"O our Allah, our Lord, You created us, while we did no create anything. You made us
die, while we did not make anything die. However, You did no make our tongues speak,
nor our ears hear, nor did you give us a Book to guide us or send us a messenger to
follow. We know nothing more than what You have taught us."
The Mighty and High will reply to them:
"O My Servants! If I gave you an order, would you follow it?""
They will say: "O our Lord, listening and obedience belongs to You."
The reporter says: he (SA) said:
Allah, the Mighty and High, will command a fire from Hell, called al-Falaq, which is the
most severe in punishment in Hell. Thus, it will come out of its place, black, darkened,
and covered with chains and shackles. Allah, the Mighty and High, will command it to
blow in the face of creation, and it will blow. As a result of the blow, the heaven will be
covered, the starts will be obliterated, the oceans will freeze, the mountains will
crumble, the vision will be impeded, pregnant women will miscarry, and the hair of
children will turn grey out of horror on the Day of Judgment.
Then Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, will command the children of the monotheists to
cast themselves into that fire. Thus, whoever was privileged in the Knowledge of Allah,
the Mighty and High, from before will cast themselves into the fire. The fire, however,
will become cool for them, and a source of safety, as it was for Ibrahim (AS).
Those whomever Allah, the Mighty and High, knows to be adverse, however, will refuse
to throw themselves into the fire. Hence, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, will command
the fire to gather them for failing to heed Allah's command, and for refusing to enter the
fire. As a result they will be in Hell in succession to their forefathers.
Such is the Word of the Mighty and High: Then (some) of them shall be unhappy and
(others) happy. So as to those who are unhappy, they shall be in the fire; for them shall
be sighting and groaning in it: Abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth
endure, except as your Lord please; surely your Lord is the Mighty Doer of what He
intends. And as to those who are made happy, they shall be in the garden, abiding in it
as long as the heavens and the earth endure, except as your Lord please; a gift which
shall never be cut off.
2. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamdani (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Abd Al-Salam ibn Salih al-Hirawi that
420

% q G IG E G G7 I H

E G _ G % L : _ G

Y Z G G IG OG Y E G H H

2 H % q G%G G GI G H H

G GO E G _ G G G IG2G G A

. 3 G I

Al-Rida (AS) said:
I asked him, "For what reason did Allah, the Mighty and High, drown the whole of the
earth in the time of Nuh (AS), while there were children among them who were free of
sin?" So he (AS) replied, There were no children among them, because Allah, the
Mighty and High, made the male reproductive system infertile and the female wombs
barren for forty years. Thus, their lineage was cut. So He drowned them while there
were no children among them. Allah, the Mighty and High, does not destroy with His
Punishment anyone who is without sin. As for the rest of Nuh's (AS) people then they
were drowned for belying Nuh, the Prophet of Allah, (AS). They were all drowned for
agreeing with the belying ones. Whoever is absent from a matter, and agrees to it, is
like one that witnesses it and commits it.
3. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of al-Abbas ibn Maruf, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Sinan,
on the authority of Talhah ibn Zayd, on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) that

G (R) H G H H G G

GG H G " : G%G E H G }

H G I L 2G G " >
.>

His father al-Baqir (AS) said
Verily, the children of the Muslims are known to Allah, the Mighty and High, as
intercessors, and those who will receive intercession.
When they become twelve years of age, the merits are written for them, and when they
reach the age of puberty, their offences are also noted down.
4. My father and Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) both said:
Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar and Ahmad ibn Idris both said, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ashari, on the authority of Ali ibn Ismail, on the authority
of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Hariz, on the authority of Zurarah that

G H G _ E 2 H H H G G

G m H G H G H G G2 G
421

d H H G " m Z I _ Z G I G" H H 2 H G C I G

O Z Z G% L IG q IG 2G3

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said:
When the Day of Judgement comes, Allah, the Mighty and High, will hold objection
against seven: the child, the one who died during the period between two prophets, the
elderly senile man who lived during the period of prophecy, the simple-minded person,
the mentally ill, the deaf and the dumb.
Each of these defendants will plead their case to Allah, the Mighty and High. Allah, the
Mighty and High, will send to them a messenger. He will light a fire for them and say:
Verily, your Lord has commanded you to jump into it. Thus, whoever jumps in it, it will
become cool, and a means of peace for him, and whoever resist will be driven to the
Hell.

5. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn
Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Saffar said, on the authority of Fadl
ibn Amir, on the authority of Musa ibn al-Qasim al-Bajali, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa,
on the authority of Hariz, on the authority of Zurarah ibn Ayun that

G% H m % I 2 G H G " H G% H E G E} G E H }

I G I L G% L H G _
C m E G G H G "
H m
G % G 3 H GG G I G Y G

2 3 H G G
G " % H G" H G G IG H H G L GG
H _ G H _ G H >
H G H G G H G G2 G
G H G _ E 2 !

G G G I H H C G C G _

G m
IG q GH G G G7 2G3 d H H G " I Z G I G" k

I saw Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) praying over the small son of Jafar (AS), so he said the
Allhhu Akbar then said: "O Zurarah! Verily, this and its likes do not require the prayer
(of the deceased). If it were not for the fact that people would say "the Hashimites do
not pray on the children,' I would not have prayed." Zurarah says: I asked him, "No, by
Allah?" He (AS) answered, For Allah, the Mighty and High, is the divine will for them.
When the Day of Judgement comes, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, will hold evidence
over seven: the child, the one that died between the time gap of two prophets, the old
man that grasped the era of a prophet while he was not sane, the simple-minded, the
mentally ill, the deaf and the dumb. Then each one of these will seek evidence on Allah,
the Mighty and High, on the Day of Judgment. Allah, the Mighty and high, will send to
422

them a messenger, who will make a fire for them and will say: Verily, your Lord has
commanded you to jump in it. Thus, whoever jumps init, it will become cool and a
means of peace for him, and whoever resists will be drive to the Hell.
6. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of al-Haytham ibn Abu
Masruq al-Nahdi, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Ali ibn Riab,
on the authority of al-Halabi that

E G I C m GG G G" H ! 2 3

G IG O$ G!" 2_ G 2 G G
G 2

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said,
Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, made Ibrahim and Sarah feed the children of the
believers from the tree in Paradise, which has udder like the udder of a cow. They are in
palaces made from pearls. When the Day of Judgement comes, they will be dressed up,
perfumed, and brought to their parents. Both the children and their parents will be
royalty in Paradise.
7. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Imran al-Ashari, on the authority of
Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Hakam, on the authority of Sayf
ibn Amrah, on the authority of Abu Bakr al-Hadrami that

I H_ G IG E G(R)G I H_ I 2 3H $
G H H H G G G7 G G2 G
G *

H G G G G H H d G G >

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: And (as for) those who believe and their offspring follow them in faith, We will
unite with them their offspring. He (AS) said: "The sons fall short of the deeds of the
fathers, so Allah, the Mighty and High, unites the sons with the fathers so that their
eyes may rest."
8. My father (RA) said: Ahmad ibn Idris said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Yahya, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab, on the authority of
Musa ibn Sadan, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn al-Qasim, on the authority of Abu
Zakariyya, on the authority of Abu Basir that

H >

G >
H G " m G GG G G%G G G >

. % GG G G%G G m H G G!" G
423

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said : When the child of believing parents passes away, a
caller warns the inhabitants of the heavens and the earth: Beware! Verily, the son of the
so and so has passed away. If the child's father, mother, or relatives have passed away,
he will be given to them so that they can feed him. If the child does not have any
immediate relatives who have passed away, then he is handed over to Fatimah,
blessings of Allah be upon her, to feed him until his parents or relatives pass away, and
then he is handed over to them.
9. Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA) said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya that Muhammad ibn Hassan said, on the authority of alHusayn ibn Muhammad al-Nawfali from the progeny of Nawfal ibn Abd al-Muttalib that
Muhammad ibn Jafar reported to me, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ai, on the authority
of Isa ibn Abd Allah al-Umari, on the authority of his father, on the authority of his
grandfather that

.G% G G H H G H q

G m
Regarding the illness that befalls a child, Ali (AS) said: It is atonement for his parents."
10. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of al-Abbas ibn Maruf, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub,
on the authority of Ali ibn Ri'ab, on the authority of Abd al-Ala freed salve of Al Sam, on the
authority of Abu Abd Allah (AS) that

Z E 4 C Z E 4 q HI H G(R) H 3 G G G2 G
_ G H G G G GI ~ G Z E 4

GG G G O G E G H H G2 H H G % H H
. G G G G H G!" G IG d
The Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
Marry virgins! Verily, they are the purest in speech, the best in morals, and the most
fertile. Have you not come to know that on the Day of Judgment, I would be proud of
you over other nations, eve for a miscarriage? The child who died during the birth will
reach the Gate of Paradise covered in camphor. Allah, the Mighty and High, will say to
it: "Enter Paradise!" It will reply: "No, not until my parents have entered." Allah, the
Mighty and High, will say to an angel: "Bring Me his parents." The child will then be
sent to Paradise in the company of his parents. Thus, Allah will say: "This is due to My
Mercy upon you."
11. My father (RA) said: Ahmad ibn Idris said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Yahya that Muhammad ibn al-Walid said, on the authority of Hammad ibn Uthman, on the
authority of Jamil ibn Durraj who said

424

G H G G O G d G G G % d : G G2 G

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) about the children of the Prophets (AS). He
replied, "They are not like the children of other people."
The reporter sys: I asked him about Ibrahim, son of the Messenger of Allah (SA), that
had he lived, would he have become a truthful one [siddiq]?
He (AS) answered, "If he had lived, he would have followed in the footsteps of his father

12. And with the same chain of transmission: on the authority of Hammad ibn Uthman, on the
authority of Amir ibn Abd Allah that

H G % GH G G G G G G"G

m G G 2 L G
H H 3 d Z I G %

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said,
On the grave of Ibrahim, son of the Messenger of Allah (SA), there was a branch that
shaded it from sunlight. By the time the branch dried up, the marks of the grave had
vanished and its place was not know.
He (AS) also added,
When Ibrahim, son of the Messenger of Allah (SA) died, he was eighteen months old.
Therefore, Allah, the Mighty and High, had his suckling period completed in Paradise.
The Compiler of this book says concerning children and their state: Verily, the process of
recognizing justice and injustice, and the way of differentiation between the two or aversion
from them, is not something innate. In fact, it is due to the approval or disapproval of the
intellect. Therefore, it is not permissible for us to refuse the evil of an action due to our
ignorance of its causes. Nor should we take it out from the boundary of justice based on its
apparent from. Rather the method, when we intend to understand the reality of a category of
actions that is hidden to us, should be the rational one. We should turn to proofs that indicate
the wisdom of their doers, and we should be devoted to proofs that introduce us to the state of
its doer. If He acts wisely and justly, then it must necessarily apply to all of His actions,
whether or not we are ignorant of their causes. This is because, as far as the intellect is
concerned, there is no shortcoming in one category of actions without the other, or
specification for one genus without the other.
Take the case of a father, for example, who we know to be just. If he amputates a limb from
his son for a reason that we are ignorant of, we cannot declare that he is unjust since we are
unaware of the reason for which he did so. As a whole, this is due to his fair appearance and
good intent for his son.
The actions of Allah, the All-Knowing of the ends and beginnings, are similar, Blessed and
Exalted be Hi. Reason requires us to believe that His Actions must be wise and just. We
cannot limit ourselves to what we know because we are ignorant of all the details which
425

motivate His Actions. We understand that we are unable to understand the causes of all
things, since we do not understand them in full. This is when we intend to understand a
sentence that enables its ignorance from the rules of His Actions, the Mighty and High.
However, if we intend to explore its meanings and discuss its causes then we are not short of
intellects, with the praise of Allah, that may make us recognize the rational reasoning in their
details, what confirms the indication on a whole. The proof that the actions of Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, are based on wisdom is that they are far form contradiction and secure
from differentiation.
The proof can also be found in their interconnectedness, the need of things to their likes, and
the damaging of its shape and connecting of every category to its resemblance until it is
imagined that it is other than what is seems. The rotation of the heavens and the movement of
the sun and the moon, and the travel of the stars would certainly obliterate and be destroyed.
Thus, when the actions of Allah, the Mighty and High, execute what we have mentioned
regarding the reasons for justice and injustice, we can only conclude that they are based on
wisdom. The proof the Mighty and High does not oppress can be found in the fact hat He,
Blessed and Exalted, is Eternal, Self-Sufficient, and All-Knowing. Furthermore, He cannot act
ignorantly.
Oppression only occurs among the ignorant or those who seek personal benefit. Since He, the
Blessed and Exalted, is Eternal and Self-Sufficient, He does not benefit or lose anything fro
knowing what was, and what will be good and evil. Everything He does is out of wisdom, and
everything He does is Right. Do you to see that those who are wise do not commit evil, as he
has sufficient self-control to refrain from evil. Whoever commits a major sin deserves criticism.
Therefore, the existence of evil is not feared from Him and this is clear. All praise is due to
Allah.
13. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamdani (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Amr ibn Uthman al-Khazzaz, on the authority of
Amr ibn Shimr, on the authority of Jabir ibn Yazid al-Jufi that

m I G Z _ G G HG" G G
G G 2 E G G G H L

! ! 2 3

Z G m H H m I G G G G G!" 2

G G I G G%G G G _ G
H % % H G(R) G H % I

m H

m

m H
m

2

.

I asked Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir (AS):
426

O son of the Messenger of Allah! Some children are born dead. Some are miscarried.
Some are born deaf or dumb. Some die the hour they are born. Some die at puberty.
And some live until they reach old age. Why is that? And what is the cause?"
Thus, he (AS) replied,
Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is the Best of Planners when it comes to the
affairs of His Creation. He is their Creator, and He is their Master. Whoever He prevents
from aging, verily, he prevents him from what was not (allocated) for him. And whoever
he allows to reach old age, He bestows upon him what was (allocated) to him. He gives
out of favor and prohibits due to Justice. He is not questioned about what He does, yet
people will be questioned about what they do.
Jabir says: I asked him, "O son of the Messenger of Allah! How is He not questioned for
what He does?"
He (AS) replied,
(He is not questioned for what He does) because everything he does is wise and just.
He is the Possessor of Greatness, the Supreme, the one (and Only), and the Subduer.
Therefore, whoever feels distressed over something that Allah has destined has
disbelieved. And whoever rejects anything from His Actions has disclaimed.

427

Chapter Sixty-Two: Anna Allah Taalal al Yafal bi Ibadih illa al-Aslah
lahum. Allah Only Des What is Best for His Servants - 13 traditions

I " 2 m !
1. Abu al-husayn Tahir ibn Muhammad ibn yunys ibn Haywah the Jurist in Balkh reported to
us that Muhammad ibn Uthman al-Hirawi said: Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn al-Husaynibn
Muhajir said: Hisham ibn Khalid said: al-Hasan ibn Yahya al-Hunayni said: Sadaqah ibn Abd
Allah said, on the authority of Hisham, on the authority of Anas that

! 2 3 H H G G G O _ G H G

o
> n
G G G Y G 2 G7 > H 3 G %G 4 G7 > H 3 G G

H G2 G% L G G GG G2 H G!"
G 2G G H G " % G d G " % G~ G " Z _ Z Z * Z % L %

GG G 2G G H G " G G q % H G % % C dG 2G G

H G " % G " m GG G 2G G H G " G %
G G H G " % G " m

C G H G " % G " m GG G 2G G H G " G % 3

_ G H G " % G " m GG G 2G G H G " G

The Prophet (SA) said: Jibra'il said: Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, said:
Whoever insults My Beloved one has declared war on Me. I do not hesitate in anything
like I do when I seize the soul of a believer. He abhors death, and I abhor his evil deeds.
However, there is no escape from it.
My Servant is never so close to Me as when he fulfils all that I have made obligatory on
him. My servant continues to perform superogatory prayers until I star to love him. And
when I stat to love him, I become his hearing, his seeing, his hand, and his supporter.
When he calls Me, I answer him. And if he asks Me for something, I bestow it upon him.
Verily, among My believing servants is one that intends an act of service, but I prevent
him from it so self-admiration does not enter him, as this would lead to his destruction.
Among My believing servants is one whose faith will not be proper unless he remains
poor, for if I made him wealthy, it would lead to his destruction. Among My believing
servants is one whose faith will not be proper unless he is wealth, for if I made him
poor it would lead to his destruction. Among My believing servants is one whose faith
will not be proper unless he is ill, for if I made him healthy, it would lead to his
428

destruction. Among My believing servant sis one whose faith would not be proper
unless he was healthy, for if I made him ill, it would lead to his destruction. Verily, I
mange My Servants though my Knowledge of what is in their hearts. Verily, I am the AllKnowing, the All-informed.
2. Abu Ahmad al-Hasan ibn Abd Allah ibn Said al-Askari said: Abd Allah ibn Muhammad
ibn Abd al-Karim said: Muhammad ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Barqi said: Amr ibn Abu Salamah
said: I read to Abu Umar al-Sanani on the authority of al-Ala' ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Abu Hurayrah that

. H H H G G G E H G G G H : G H
The Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
There are many beggars with unkempt hair, who are covered in dust, and who wear
nothing but two tattered garments, who are turned away when they knock on doors. If
they swear by
Allah, the Mighty and High, He will keep their oath.
3. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Sinan, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn al-Munkadir that

E G _ % 3 dE G G G2 G

G L 2 G G % L H 2 3 G" G G G G 2
.H H % H H Z G qH G H G G

Awn ibn Abd Allah ibn Masud became sick as I went to visit him. He said: "Shall I not
related to you a tradition from Abd Allah ibn masud?"
I replied, "Why not?"
He said: Abd Allah said: "While we were in the presence of the Messenger of Allah
(SA), he smiled. So I asked him, "What is it, O Messenger of Allah?"
He (SA) replied, "I am surprised at how a believer can worry about being sick. If he
knew the reward which resides in illness, he would ask to be ill until he meets his Lord,
the Mighty and High."
4. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Yaqub ibn Yazid, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu
Umayr, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim that

! 2 3
I > H H G 3 H G " G G 2
% H G G 2 m

H G G IG L H > I

429

G $ G!" H H 3 d
G qG G I G G _ H H

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
A group of people came to a prophet and said: Pray to your Lord for us that He may
remove death from us. Hence, he prayed for them, and Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
removed death from them. Due to their increase in number, their houses became
congested and their offspring increased. A man used to wake up in the morning and
had to feed, please, and take care of his father, mother, grandfather, and greatgrandfather. As a result, he became preoccupied with seeking means of subsistence.
Consequently, they came to the prophet and said: Ask your Lord to return death to us,
as we had before. She asked his Lord, the Mighty and high, and He returned them to
their moment of death.
5. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Abd Allah ibn Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi (RA) said: My father
said, on the authority of his grandfather Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the authority of alHasan ibn Ali ibn Fuddal, on the authority of Ali ibn Uqbah, on the authority of his father, on
the authority of Sulayman ibn Khalid, on the authority of Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather (AS) who said that

H G > H E > G G : G _ G%G G G H G G2 G
E G % H G G G G L 2 G G L G H G ~d

.G G G2 G G7 % Z

One day the Messenger of Allah smiled until his teeth were showing, He (SA) said:
"Will you not ask me why I smiled?"
The replied, "Of course, O Messenger of Allah."
He (SA) saiam astonished at a Muslim person that there is not a prayer, which
Allah, the Mighty and High, grants him except there is good for him in the Hereafter."
6. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sadabadi said, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Abu Qatadah al-Qummi that Abd Allah ibn Yahya said, on the authority of Aban
al-Ahmar that

2 ! 2 3
H G " Z G _ G _ G H : E H G }

H G G H G " G G
.G 2 G H G G G H H G " G G G
Al-Sadiq Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) said:
Verily, I swear by the One that send my grandfather (SA) as a righteous prophet that
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, give sustenance to a servant according to his
430

generosity. Verily, the help provided from Heaven is based on the extent of the need.
And verily, patience must match the level of affliction.
7. Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA) said: My father said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa
said, on the authority of Abd al-Rahman ibn Abu Najran, on the al-Mufaddal ibn Salih, on the
authority of Jabir ibn Yazid al-Jufi that

G G 2 E G G G H E} G

G G _ GZ Z G I G~ 3

.

Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn Ali al-baqir (AS) said:
Verily, Musa son of Imran (AS) said: "O my Lord! I am pleased with what You have
decreed regarding taking the souls of the elderly, and leaving the souls of the young."
Allah, the Mighty and High, replied, "O Musa! Are you not pleased with Me for being
their Sustainer and Provider [kafil]?"
Musa replied, "Of course, O Lord. You are the best Custodian, and the Best Provider."
8. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Sadabadi said, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu al-Hazhaz, on the
authority of ali ib al-Hasan that

G GG H H H G " m G G2 L G G G _ G
. G%G G % G m G " 2 H G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS):
"Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, has provided the believer with sustenance from
places they cannot even imagine. The pleas of a servant increase when he has no idea
where his sustenance will come from."
9. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Barmaki said: Jafar ibn Sulayman ibn Ayyub alKhazzaz said: Abd Allah ibn al-Fadl al-Hashimi said

G 3 G7 I G G G7 ! 2 3 E GH _ G G G2 GG L

G!" I G L G 3 _ IG (c)
G7 H G ! 2 3 H G " E
Z I Z G G H G G G7 I H GH G 3 G I H H % G H G C
E E I E I H E G!" I I G
E 2 G I x >

G _ 2 % G I 3H % G I G"
431

E I q Y I G H 2 GH G G G G2 G

G qG G I H G G _ H G7 _ G G7 G G I 2 _ G G G G7 >

Y G G 3 2G G2 m
I G G G2G G Z ! 2 3 H G " G H E G I G!" G G

G H G C G!" I G H G " H G G _ G Z 2 G H G " G IG 3 H 3 G IG Y G
G7 I _ G G G G G!" I G I _ G GG H 2C G!" I G

G G G I G H G G H G G IG Y
H G " G G IGG G G G I

m ! 2 3
H G I H G "G G2G G

.

I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "Why did Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, place
the sols in bodies when they had been in the highest of realms?" Thus, he (AS) replied,
Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, knows that whenever the spirits are left on their
own in their elevated and high place, most of them dispute over the Lordship for other
than the Mighty and High. Therefore, He placed them with His Power into the bodies,
which He had decreed for them from the beginning of the Divine Decree.
Bearing them in mind and having mercy over them, He made them in need of each
other, and connected them to each other. He elevated the status of some over others,
and sufficed some of them for others. He sent messengers to them and made them
proofs over them as bearers of good news and warners. They commanded them to seek
their Lord, and to be humble before God through acts of devotion. They set punishment
and rewards for them, for now and in the future to promote the good and to forbid the
evil. He humbled them by making them seek their own means of sustenance and
earning so that they may know that they have a Lord and that they are created servants.
He accept their service and through it they deserve the ever-lasting bounty and the
eternal paradise. They should make peace rather than fight over what they have no
right. He (AS) then added, O son of al-Fadl! Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
intends for His Servants better than what they do for themselves. Do you not see that
people seek nothing but self-elevation, until some of them claim to be God? Among
them are people who falsely claim the Prophethood, and among them are some who
falsely claim the reigns of divine leadership [Imamate], knowing full well their
deficiencies, their inability, their limitations, their lowliness, their need, their lack, their
suffering, and the death will overpower them and subdue them all. O son of al-Fadl!
Verily, Allah the Blessed and Exalted wishes nothing but the best for His Servants. He
does not oppress the people at all. On the contrary, it is the people who oppress
themselves.

432

10. Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Shaybani (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi
said: Musa ibn Imran al-NakhaI said, on the authority of his paternal uncleal-Husayn ibn Yazi
al-Nawfali, on the authority of Ali ibn Salim, on the authority of his father, on the authority of

H H G G % d : G G H }
. I % G%G 2G m G I I GG C G
Abu Basir that I asked Abu Abd Allah Jafar al-Sadiq (AS) about the Word of Allah, the
Mighty and High: And they shall continue to differ, except those on whom your Lord
has mercy; and for this did He create them.
He replied, "He created them to do what makes them deserve His Mercy so that He may
have mercy on them."
11. Muhammad ibn al-Qasim al-Astarabadi said: Yusuf ibn Muhammad ibn Ziyad and ali ibn
Muhammad ibn Sayyar both said, on the authority of their father, on the authority of al-Hasan
ibn Ali, on the authority of his father Ali ibn Muhammad, on the authority of his father
Muhammad ibn Ali, on the authority of his father, Ali ibn Musa al-Rida, on the authority of his
father Musa ibn Jafar, on the authority of his father Jafar ibn Muhammad, on the authority of
his father Muhammad ibn Ali (AS) that

G G O2 G Z G O I Z G G H H H G G G7 G G _ G G%G

a

G 3 G G IG H H % H G 3 G2 G G G G7 G G H

G E G G2 G G G%G 3 IG I

3

H G H H H G G G I I IG

% G b Z Z G Z %
H H G 3 G2 G 2 G
H H H G G G Z G Z G GZ

G GH G G Z Z 2 Z 3 Z G >

GH G G G _ G G G E 4 G I H
I E 4 G *
G 2 3
433

. ! 2 3 C I Y

His father, Ali ibn al-Husayn (AS), was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty
and High: Who made the Earth a resting place for you. He (AS) said
He made it suitable for your nature and in harmony with your bodies. He did not make it
severely hot and warm so it may burn you, nor severely cold so it may freeze you.
Neither did He make it severely perfumed to give you headaches, nor did He make it
terribly foul-smelling so it may sicken you. He neither made it severely soft like water
so it may drown you, nor did He make it severely hard so it may obstruct you from
making houses, buildings, and graves for your deceased.
However, Allah, the Mighty and High, made it with firmness so that you could benefit
form it, enabling your bodies to walk upon it and your houses to hold together. He
placed in it soft soil so that you could build your homes upon it, dig graves, and so that
you could find other benefits. This is why He made the earth a resting place for you.
Then the Mighty and high said: Heaven a canopy, i.e. a protecting roof over you, where
its sun, moon and stars rotate for your benefit. The Mighty and High then said: And
(Who sends down water from heaven, i.e. the rain which He sends down form a height
so that I may reach the highest points of the mountains, the hills, the elevations, and
the low-lying land. Then He separated the rain into drizzle, shower, heavy downpour,
and sprinkles so that he earth could better absorb it. He did not sent the rain down in
one shot, as that would have destroyed our lands, trees, field and fruits.
Then the Mighty and High said: Then brings forth with it subsistence for you of the
fruits; therefore, do not set up rivals to Allah, i.e. Images or idols, which cannot think,
hear, see, and do not have power over anything. While you know, that they do not have
power over the magnificent bounties which your Lord, the Blessed and Exalted, ha
blessed you with.
12. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Dawud ibn Kathir alRaqqi, on the authority of Abu Ubaydah al-Hadhdah', on the authority of Abu Jafar (AS) who
said

G G G G 2G G7 G I GG G 2G G H G " % H G

G d G 2G G7 % Y qG G! H G7 H I G G G G G

G 2G G G % I E G%G G L G m G2 m H G% Z G"
% H H H G%G Y G G G G!" q _ q G G %

H %H C G G _G 2 G G H H G%G3 2G G7

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
Allah, Great be His Gory, said:
Verily, among My believing servants are those who strive to worship Me. They wake up
from their sleep and the comfort of their pillows to perform supererogatory prayers
during the night. They exhaust themselves in My Worship. Since I look out for them, I
overpower them with sleep for a night or two for watching over them. They sleep until
morning, and when they get up, they are disgusted with themselves and afflicted over
it. If I do not prevent them from worshiping Me as they desire, they would become
proud, which would lead to their destruction. They could even reach a point that they
434

would believe that they have exceeded all the worshippers. Inadequacy is possible in
My Worship. People can reach a point when they think they are drawing close to Me,
when they are actually straying far away from Me.
13. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub,
on the authority of Malik ibn Atiyyah, on the authority of Dawud ibn Farqad that

G 2 G H G!" qH Z L

G G2 G% m G % G G%G % G G%G H G" G G
. G d Gc G G G G " G G Gm_ _ G7 %2 Gc G Gc Y n

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Among what Allah, the Mighty and High, revealed to Musa was:
O Musa, I have not crated a creation more beloved to Me than My believing servant.
Verily, I try him with what is good for him, and cure him for what is good for him. I know
what is best for My Servant in his affairs. Hence, he should be patient with My Trials. He
should thank me for My Bounties. And he should be pleased with My Destiny. If he act
for My Pleasure, and obeys My Command, I will count hi among the truthful ones.

435

Chapter Sixty-Three: Al-Amr wa-al-Nahy wal-al-Wad wa-al-Waid.
Command, Prohibition, Promise and Threat - 10 traditions

1. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi, on the authority of his
father, on the authority of Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Mansur ibn Hazim that

. H %

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The people have been commanded and prohibited.
Whoever has an excuse, Allah, the Mighty and High, forgives him."
2. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa said, on the
authority of Abd al-Rahman ibn Abu Najran, on the authority of Hisham ibn Salim, on the
authority of Habib al-Sajistani that

Z G H G7 H G " :

G G G G G " G G G (R) G G I
.G! G G G7 H G ! G! G G7

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said:
Verily, it is stated in the Torah: O Musa! Verily, I have created you, chosen you,
strengthened you, commanded you for My Obedience, and prohibited you from
disobeying Me. Therefore, if you obey Me I will help you to obey Me and if you disobey
Me, I will not help you to disobey me. O Musa! I have favored you in your obedience to
Me, and I have evidence over you in your disobedience of Me.
3. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of both Muhammad ibn Abu al-Khattab and Ahmad ibn Abu Abd
Allah al-Barqi, on the authority of Ali ibn Muhammad al-Qasani, on the authority of who he
mentioned, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn al-Qasim al-Jafari on the authority of Abu Abd
Allah (AS), on the authority of his forefathers (AS) that

% G I Z E G G%GO$ G G2 G
.G G G G%G I Z G E
436

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: "Whoever Allah promises to reward for an action, He
will fulfill it. And whoever He threatens with punishment over an action, He may choose
(either punishment or pardon)."
4. Abu Ali al-Husayn ibn Ahmad al-Bayhaqi said in Naysabur year 352 AH that Muhammad
ibn Yahya al-Suli reported to us that Ibn Dhukwan said: I heard Ibrahim ibn al-Abbas say

I H G G G O2 o

G H H G " H H G G G

We were in the presence of al-Rida (AS) when the discussion was about the major sins,
and the Mutazilite belief that they shall not be forgiven.
Hence, al-Rida (AS) said:
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"The Qur'an contradicts the belief of the Mutazilites. Allah, the Mighty and High, says:
Verily, your Lord is the Lord of forgiveness to people despite their injustice.
The Compiler of this book says: The tradition is detailed; we have extracted from it the
required passage.
5. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Haytham al-Ijli; Ahmad ibn al-Hasan al-Qittan; Muhammad
ibn Ahmad al-Sinani; al-Husayn ibn Ibrahim ibn Ahmad ibn Hisham al-Mukattab; Abd Allah
ibn Muhammad al-Saigh and Ali ibn Abd Allah al-Warraq (may All be pleased with them) all
said: Abu al-Abbas Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Zakariyyah al-Qittan said: Bakr ibn Abd Allah ibn
Husayn said: Tamim ibn Buhlul said: Abu Muawiyah said, on he authority of al-Amash that

I _ I H G " Z Y

E G 3 E G G 2G IG

G G H H _ m G G
m H H e H G " G Y G G H # G G G 3 G%G G G

I C G m G IG m %H m G G2G H H }

H 2 m G%G } % H m G G2G G G x m G%G G G

Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) said the following regarding Islamic law:
Verily, Allah does not impose anything on a soul except what it can bear, and does not
oblige it to do anything it does not have the strength to do. The actions of the servants
are created with decreed [taqdir] creation, not with constitutional [takwin] creation and
Allah is the Creator of all Things. We do not believe in determinism or relinquishment.
437

Allah, the Mighty and High, does not hold the innocent to be that guilty, nor does Allah,
the Mighty and High, punish children for the sins of their fathers. For verily, He has said
in Perfect Book: And no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another; the Mighty
and High says: And that man shall have nothing but what he strives for. Allah, the
Mighty and High, forgives and favors. It is not befitting of the Mighty and High to
oppress.
Allah, the Mighty and High, does not oblige His Servants to obey the one that may lead
them astray and misguided them. When He selects His Servants to be His Messengers,
he does not select any that disbelieve in Him, and who may serve Satan instead of Him.
He never appoints but an infallible person as a Proof over His Creation.
The Compiler of this book says: The tradition is detailed; we have extracted from it the
required passage. I have transmitted all of it in the book Al-Khisal.
6. Ahmad ibn Ziyad ibn Jafar al-Hamdani (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr that

% I 3 G O2 2G 3 G " ! 2 3 G G O H G d m GG G G O2 q

G G G O2 G G G H G" m G L G E G G%GO$ G GH G2G
3

G G%G G 3 G G H G "
m m o
G ! G G O2 G G
G% G G H G " Z 2 qG 3 E G G Z 3 G O2 qG 3
Eq G I % _ % 3 % % 3
H Z 3 G H G x C G H
H % q G 3 E G G %2G 3
E G G GGH G m o

G q 3 G H G " I q %H m Ga G Z G2 qG 3 E G
H G Z G Z 2G O3
q 3 G G E G % H G % }

m *

G G G G G G2 C G H G G G Z G
438

_ % G 3 G G H G "
m I H G(R) 3 G G H G "
m H G

H >

. G G G G%G G G
G C G % 2 3 G % G 3 G >

Musa ibn Jafar (AS) said:
Allah will not make the Hell eternal for anyone except for those who disbelieved and
denied, and those who went astray and rejected monotheism. Believers who refrained
from major sins will not be asked about the minor sins they may have committed.
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, says: If you shun the great sins which you are
forbidden, We will do away with your small sins and cause you to enter an honorable
place of entering.
The reporter says: I asked him, "O son of the messenger of Allah (SA)! To which
sinners does intercession [shafaat] apply?"
He (AS) replied, "My father (AS) related to me, on the authority of his forefathers (AS)
the authority of Ali (AS) that: The Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
"Verily, my intercession applies to the members of my Ummah who committed major
sins. As for the good-doers, they should not be concerned."
Ibn Abu Umayr says: I asked him, O son of the Messenger of Allah! How can
intercession apply to those who commit major sins, when Allah, exalted be His
Remembrance, says: And they do not intercede except for him whom He approves and
for fear of Him they tremble; and whoever commits major sins cannot be the approved
one, Thus, he (AS) responded, O Abu Ahmad! There is not a believer who commits a sin
but that it grieves him, and he regrets it. The Prophet (SA) has said: "Regret is
sufficient for repentance." He (AS) has also said: Whoever is pleased by his good
deeds and grieved by his bad deeds is a believer." Therefore, he who commits a sin,
and does not regret it, is not a believer, and intercession will not apply to him because
he is unjust. Allah, exalted be His Remembrance, says: The unjust shall not have nay
compassionate friend nor any intercessor who should be obeyed.
I asked him, "O son of the Messenger of Allah! Why is a person an unbeliever is he
does not feel any remorse for his sins?" He (AS) replied, O Abu Ahmad! If someone
knows that he has committed a major sin, and knows that he will be punished for it, he
will surely regret his action. If feels remorse, he has repented, and deserves
intercession. If he does not regret his action, he will persist in his sin. Persistent,
habitual sinners are not forgiven, because they do not believe that they will be
punished for their actions. If they believed in the punishment then surely they would
regret their action. The Prophet (SA) said: No major sin remains after repentance. And
no sin remains minor if one engages in it habitually. As for the Word of Allah, the
Mighty and High: And they do not intercede except for him whom He approves; then he
will not receive intercession unless Allah approves his belief. Belief is the confirmation
of reward for good deeds and punishment over bad deeds. If Allah accepts a person's
faith as sincere, it is because the person regrets the sins he has committed, and fears
their punishment on the Day of Judgment.
7. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Ali ibn la-Husayn al-Sadabadi said, on
the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah la-Barqi, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Hamzah ibn Humran that

I G % L 2G I G G (R) % L 2G I m E G H : G G2 G
I m G (R) I m H G% q 3 I m E _ G H E OGG 2 G!" m G G
m
439

E G _ I G G " I G G G % L 2G
q G " G% q 3 I G
3 G (R) >

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
He who intends to accomplish a good deed, and does not do so, one good deed is
written down for him. However, if he accomplished the good deed, then ten good deeds
are written down for him. Allah multiplies good deeds for anyone He wished up to
seven hundred times. Whoever intends to accomplish a bad deed, and does not do it,
no bad deed will be written down for him unless he does it. If he does not accomplish
the bad deed, then one good deed is written down for him because he avoided the bad
deed. Even if he does a bad deed, it is only recorded nine hours after it was done. In the
event hat he repents within this period, it will not be recorded. However, if he fails to
repent for his sin or express any remorse over it, a single offence will be recorded
against him.
8. Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Ghalib al-ShafiI said: Abu Muhammad ibn Mujahid ibn
Ayun ibn Dawwud reported to us that Isa ibn Ahmad al-Asqalani reported to us that al-Nadr
ibn Shumayyil reported to us that Israfil reported to us that Thuwayr reported, on the authority
of his father that

G m H G " H H G%G G H G!" qH $ G $

. * m G
Ali (AS) said:
There is not a verse in the Quran more beloved to me that the Word of the Mighty and
High: Surely Allah does not forgive that anything should be associated with Him, and
forgives what is beside that to whomsoever He pleases.
9. Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Tamim al-Sarkhasi said in Sarkhas that Abu Lubayd
Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shami said: Ishaq ibn Israil related to me that Hariz said, on the
authority of Abd al-Aziz', on the authority of Zayd ibn Wahab that

% G n
Y G " % G G G (R) G! H G Z L #

G G H G " Z % L
% G Z H G " G G

G G G! Z % L Z G%G G G G
H G H G G! G % E G7

G " ~ G " m G 2 % G ~G" H 2
440

H qG G G7 % _ 3 G G
Z G G C Z L G ~G(R) G {

H Z H H GG G m >

G O

. (c)

G O L

I went out one night. The Messenger of Allah (SA) was all alone. I thought that he was
averse to anyone walking with him. When I started walking in the moon light, he turned
around and saw me.
He enquired, "Who is that?"
I answered, "Abu Dharr. May Allah make me your ransom!"
He (SA) saiome here, O Abu Dharr!"
So I walked with him for some time. He said:
Verily, the ones with much will be the ones with less. On the Day of Resurrection with
the exception of those Allah has favoured. His Favour will spread to them from right to
left, and from front to back. It will fill them with good.
Abu Dharr says: I continued to walk with him for a while.
Then he (SA) said: "Sit down here. He made me sit down in some low ground around
which was stones." He said to me, "Sit down until I return to you."
He (Abu Dharr) said: He went to a stony area until I could no longer see him. His delay
was prolonged. Then I heard him coming, while saying, "Even if he fornicated and eve if
he stole?"
He said: When he came back, I immediately asked him, "O Prophet of Allah! May Allah
make me your ransom! Who are you talking to in the stony area for I did not hear
anyone answer you?"
He replied, "It was Jibra'il who appeared to me in that stony area and said: Glad tidings
to your Ummah that anyone who dies without associating anything with Allah, the
Mighty and High, will enter Heaven."
He (SA) added, "I asked Jibra'il: Even if he fornicated and even if he stole?' He replied:
Yes, and even if he drank wine.'"
The Compiler of this book says: What he means by this is that he will succeed in repentance
so that he may enter Paradise.
10. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Muadh al-Jawhari, on the
authority of al-Sadiq Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS), on the authority of is forefather, blessings of
Allah be upon them that

G! H m Z G2 Z G Z 2 q % H G O G G G
G! H m Z G2
Z G Z 2 q Z q H G % > }

.% > % % _

The Messenger of Allah (SA) said: Jibrail (AS) said: Allah, great be His Glory said:
Whoever commits a sin, major or minor, and he does not believe that I have a right to
punish him over it or to forgive for it, then I will never forgive him for that sin ever.
441

Whoever commits a sin, whether be it minor or major, believing that I have a right to
punish him over it or forgive for it, I forgive him.

442

Chapter Sixty-Four: Al-Tarif wa-al Bayan wa-al-Hujjah waalHiddayah. Recognition, Explanation, Evidence, and Guidance - 17
traditions

1. My father (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa
said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Umayr on the authority of Muhammad ibn
Hukaym that

. I
G G 2G G H H G G G G I G G G2 GG L
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "What is the origin of recognition?"
He (AS) answered, "It is entirely from Allah, the Mighty and High. The servants do not
have any part in it."
2. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: al-Husayn ibn al-Hasan ibn
Aban said, on the authority of al-Husayn ibn Said, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the
authority of Jamil ibn Durraj, on the authority of Ibn al-Tayyar that

. I

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, will hold evidence against the people with what He
gave them and made them to recognize."
3. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said, on the authority of his paternal uncle Muhammad
ibn Abu al-Qasim, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the authority of Ibn
Fuddal, on the authority of Thalabah ibn Maymun, on the authority of Hamzah ibn al-Tayyar
that

. I
H G " : G G 2 G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, will hold evidence against the people with what He
gave them and made them to recognize."

4. Muhammad ibn Ali Majilwayh (RA) said, on the authority of his paternal uncle Muhammad
ibn Abu al-Qasim, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the authority of Ibn
Fuddal, on the authority of Thalabah ibn Maymun, on the authority of Hamzah ibn al-Tayyar
that

443

H I _ 2 H G" Z H G G
H H G G G7 G G2 G
HG" 3 G d3 I H I I d % G m G%G I _ m H

H H H Z G3 H G " Z G$ H G "

.

G m I 2C
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: It is not for Allah to lead people astray after guiding them. He even makes clear to
them what they should guard against. He (AS) said: He even makes them recognize
what pleases Him and what angers Him. He has also said: Then He inspired i9t to
understand what is right and wrong for it. He has explained obligations and
prohibitions. He has also said: Surely We have shown him the way: he may be thankful
or unthankful. He made us recognize what to accept or to avoid.
And concerning the word of the Mighty and High: And as to Thamud, We should them
the right way, but they chose error above guidance. He (AS) said: "We made them to
recognize, but they consciously chose misguidance over guidance."
5. Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the authority of Ibn
Bukayr, on the authority of Hamzah ibn Muhammad that

_ H G G H H H G G % d : G G2 G

I asked Abu Abd Allah about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: And pointed out
to him the two conspicuous ways." He (AS) said; "They are the way of good and the
way of evil."
6. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar (RA) said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Yahya, on the authority of Musa ibn Jafar alBaghdadi, on the authority of Ubayd Allah al-Dihqan, on the authority of Durust, on the
authority of who related to him that

I G IG G 2G G H G : G G2 G
.
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The servants have no role in six things:
recognition, ignorance, pleasure, anger, sleep and wakefulness."
7. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said, on
the authority of Muhammad ibn al-Husayn, on the authority of Abu Shuayb al-Mahamili, on
the authority of Durust ibn Abu Mansur, on the authority of Burayd ibn Muawiyah al-Ijli that

I _ m G G G I _ m 2 G m G%G : G G 2 G
. 2 m I

444

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: It is not compulsory for the creation to recognize
Allah until He introduces Himself to them. It is compulsory for Allah that He introduces
Himself to the creation. It is compulsory for the creation to accept Allah when He
introduces Himself to them.
8. My father (RA) said: Abd Allah ibn Jafar al-Himyari said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of al-Hajjal, on the authority of Thalabah ibn Maymun,
on the authority of Abd al-Ala ibn Ayun that

. 4 G% Z G m H G G2 L d
I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) whether a person who knows nothing has any
responsibility. He (AS) replied, "No."
9. Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Yayha al-Attar (RA) said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the authority of Ibn Fuddal, on the authority of
Dawud ibn Farqad, on the authority of Abu al-Hasan Zakariyya ibn Yahya that

. I I G 2G G % G q : G G 2 G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Whatever of His Knowledge Allah has concealed
from the servants is unburdened from them."

10. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Abd Allah ibn Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Barqi (RA) said, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather Ahmad ibn Abu Abd Allah, on the
authority of Ali ibn al-Hakam, on the authority of Aban al-Ahmar, on the authority of Hamzah
ibn al-Tayyar that

3 $ G G 2G C H H H G " G G H G " H d q G! : G G2 G

G G% Z G I G" H I

m
G I G " G _ q G

G G 2 H G%G G (R) _ G _ G I G "
m

H G G%G % H G% H G " Z G 3 G
E G7 Z G 3 G G G G!" > G " G
G E 4 C G IG G G H G " G G
C m GI H G " H I H G"

m E 4 C %

445

.

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) told me: "Write down the following." Then he (AS) dictate
to me: Verily, among our belief is that Allah, the Mighty and High, will judge His
Servants on the basis of the means He grants them, and what He introduced to them.
He then sent the Messenger (SA) to them, and revealed to him the Book (the Qur'an) in
which He commanded and He forbade. In it, He commanded the ritual prayer and ritual
fasting. Thus, the Messenger of Allah (SA) was made to sleep in and miss the prayer.
Hence, Allah said: I made you sleep, and I wake you up. Now go and pray. They way,
they will learn what they should do when this happens to them. It is not as they say:
When one sleeps in and misses a prayer, he is lost.' The same applies to fasting. Allah
says: I make you ill and I cure you. Once I cure you, make up for the fasting you have
missed.' Abu Abd Allah (AS) then added, I view all matters, this way. You will not find
any of my followers oppressed by religion. Nor will you find anyone over whom Allah
has not provided evidence through His Divine Will. I do not say: They can do whatever
they wish.' Then he (AS) continued, Verily, it is Allah who guides and misleads. He only
commands people to do what they are capable of doing. Whatever the people are
commanded to do, they have the ability to do it. Whatever the people are unable to do,
they have not been commanded to do it. Still, most people are devoid of good.
Then he (AS) read this verse: It shall be no crime in the weak, nor in the sick, not in
those who do not find what they should spend (to stay being), so long as they are
sincere to Allah and His Messenger; there is no way (to blame) against the doers of
good; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful; nor in those who when they came to you that
you might carry them. [And said:] Thus, they are unburdened from these, because they
cannot find them.
The Compiler of this book says: His (AS) word: "Verily, it is Allah that guides and misleads."
The meaning of this is that He, the Mighty and High, guides the believers to Paradise on the
Day of Judgment, and misleads the unjust away from Paradise. Verily, the Mighty and High,
has said: Surely (as for) those who believe and do good, their Lord will guide them by
their faith; there shall flow from beneath them rivers in gardens of bliss. The Mighty and
High has also said: And Allah causes the unjust to go astray.
11. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Hashim, on the authority of Ismail ibn Marrar, on
the authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman, on the authority of Hammad, on the authority of

G H G7 G G G2 GG L : G 2

H I _ 2 H G" Z H G G

.% G m G%G I _ m
446

Abd al-Ala that I asked Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS): "May Allah be in peace with you!
Has he given all people the means to recognize Him?" He (AS) replied, "No."
I asked, "Are they then obliged to recognize Him?" He (AS) answered, "No, The
explanation must come from Allah: Allah does not impose on any soul except
according to its ability. And Allah lays no burden on the any soul save to the extent to
which He has enabled it. The reporter says: I asked him about the Word of Allah, the
Mighty and High: It is not for Allah to lead people astray after guiding them. He even
makes clear to them what they should guard against.
He (AS) replied, "He even makes them recognize what pleases Him, and what angers
Him."
12. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of Yunus ibn Abd al-Rahman,
on the authority of Sadan, who eliminated the source of report to Abu Abd Allah (AS), that

G% H H H G G H IG % H G " G G G E 2 G H H

H G % G % H G G G% % H Z G %

q G % % H G% H %
G G H G G% % H G%G3 G7 Z G G%G2 Y

.c)

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq said:
Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, has not given a bounty to a servant except that He
has placed in it for him evidence from Allah, the Mighty and High.
Therefore, whoever Allah favors, making him powerful, His Evidence over him is that he
establish his obligations and tolerate those who are weaker than him.
Whoever Allah favors with wealth, His Evidence over him is his wealth. It is an
obligation upon him to take care of the poor with superogatory charity.
Whoever Allah favors by making noble in lineage and handsome, His Evidence over
him is that he praise Allah for his blessings. He should not neglect the need, or deprive
the weak of their rights due to his lineage and good looks.
13. My father (RA) said: Abd Allah ibn Jafar al-Himyari said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad, on the authority of Ibn al-Fuddal, on the authority of Ali ibn Uqbah, on the
authority of his father saying that

G H G 3 m G G2 L G

G 3 G G!" m

H n
447

q G " H H H G " m G L G ~G" G G 3 HG"

. G o

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Leave your matter for Allah, and do not leave it for the people. Whatever is for Allah
belongs to Allah alone, and whatever is for the people will not ascend to Allah Do not
argue with the people about your religion, for verily arguing is an illness of the heart.
Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, said to His Prophet (SA) Surely you cannot guide
whom you love, but Allah guides whom He pleases. He has also said: Will you then
force men till they become believers?
Leave the people, for verily the people take their knowledge from each other, while you
have your knowledge from the messenger of Allah (SA). Verily, I have heard my father,
Muhammad al-Baqir (AS) say that Verily, when Allah, the Mighty and High, writes that a
servant should enter a matter, then he is quicker than a bird to its nest."

14. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ibn Abu UImayr, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Humran, on the Sulayman ibn
Khalid that

E G Z G%G2 G7 L Z E 2 G G " ! 2 3 H G " : G G2 G
H G%G2 G H Z G%G2 G7 L Z E 2 G G " _ m Z G%G H G%G2 G
% GH m G G G G m % G I G G G G 3 H % C G m Z G%G

G G m m . G
G H o

.

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Verily, if Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, intends good for a servant, then He places a
spot of light in his heart, expands the hearing of his heart, and assigns an angel over
him to direct him. If He intends evil for a servant, He places a black sport in his heart,
blocks the hearing of his heart, and assigns a demon over him to misled him."
The he (AS) recited this verse: Therefore, (for) whomsoever Allah intends that He would
guide him aright, He expands his breast for Islam, and (for) whomsoever He intends
that He should cause him to err, He makes his breast strait and narrow as though he
were ascending upwards.

The Compiler of this book says: Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, intends evil for a servant as
a result of a sin that he has committed. As a result, his heart receives the stamp, and a demon
is assigned to mislead him. Allah only does this to those who deserve it. And sometimes Allah
assigns an angel over His Servant to dir4ect him according to what he has earned, and as part
of Allahs favor. Allah is Merciful towards whomsoever He pleases. Allah, the Mighty and High,
says: And whoever turns himself away from the remembrance of the Most
Compassionate, We appoint fro him a Shaytan, so he becomes his associate.

448

15. Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab said: Ahmad ibn al-Fadl ibn al-Mughayrah
reported to us that Mansur ibn Abd Allah ibn Ibrahim al-Isbahani said: Ali ibn Abd Allah said:
Abu Shuayb al-Mahamili said, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Muskan, on the authority of
Abu Basir that

G I G%GO G H H G G G % G 2 G I G G G G % H G G 2 G
E G G 2G H G " G
G I IG G 2G G Y
E G 3
.

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked whether recognition is obtained.
Thus, he (AS) answered, "No." It was asked from him, "Then, is it bestowed by Allah,
the Mighty and High?" He (AS) replied, "The servants do not have a part in it. The only
things they obtain are their actions." Then he (SA) added, "The actions of the servants
are created with decreed creation, and not with constitutional creation. In other word,
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has always been All-Knowing of their decrees, even
before their creation."
16. Abd al-Walid ibn Muhammad ibn Abdus al-Naysabur al-Attar (RA) said: Ali ibn
Muhammad ibn Qutaybah al-Naysaburi said, on the authority of Hamdan ibn Sulayman that

G G G7 H G 2G q E G I G 2G G %d _ G!" L 2
.E x dGG 2G G 2 H H G
I wrote to al-Rida (AS) asking him whether the actions of the servants are created or
uncreated? So he (AS) wrote back, "The actions of the servants were decreed through
the Knowledge of Allah, the Might and High, two thousand years before the creation of
the servants."
17. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said, on the authority of al-Qasim ibn Muhammad
al-Isbahani, on the authority of Sulayman ibn Dawud al-Minqari, on the authority of Hafs ibn
Ghiyath al-NakhaI al-Qadi that

. m G x G G G G G 2
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Whoever practices what he knows, suffices for
what he does not know."

449

Chapter Sixty-Five: Majlis al-Rida Maa Alil al-Adyan wa Ashab alMaqalat fi al-Tawhid Indda al-Mamun. A Session of al-Rida (AS)
with Theologians from Among the Rhetoricians and Various
Religions about Unity in the presence of al-Mamun - 1 tradition

> > o

1. Abu Muhammad Jafar ibn Ali ibn Ahmad the jurist resident of Qum then of al-Iylaq (RA)
said: Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Sadaqah al-Qummi reported to us
that Abu Amr Muhammad ibn Umar ibn Abd Aziz al-Ansari al-Kajji related to me that one
who heard from al-Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Nawfali al-Hashimi related to me that

G >

% E I G d G!" _

G 3 L 2 E G H G" ~G" I H d G IG q H

n

E G7 C G H E H G "

H O

G m GG G H G " G_ G G H!

>

H G" G Y L 2 G " H 3 I ^ L o

G G " I ^ L 2

C G H E H G " Z n

_ G G G7 G E G _ G a G H G G a

G L C G G! H G " L

G G G G L G L >

G G 2

G 2 G7 G G! G G G GG G

450

G n

_ >
n

Z H H G " L G " % H G _ G
H G I L G G " E 2 EG"

% H % G m G G I
G 2 H
G2 H % G L G 2 G

3 C G H H 2 G L G
L d qC G 3 C G G! G " G IG }

GH G G R)G G GG G G IG 3 G G H G GAE G G G " Y

G G IG H G GG C G G IG H G G GG G I G IG H G G G GG H G GG

G H d G G! G!" % 3 % H L E G H L G (R) G IG 3 G >

GG _ G GG H G " H % G H 3 G G % E G G G H
G7 G G _ G L G % E I
3 2 H

G G H dH 3 H G " G G G!" G O ~G(R) G H _ % G%G 3 G "

H G G (R) G d H % #

E H d _ H H _GG I G G7 }

G G H G d G _ Z E G G G

G G G!" L H Z % _ G% Z G 2 d

% G 3 %H 3 % _ 3 qGC d EqG G G _ G _ G GL G G G G }

_ % G%G G E G n

C G R)G L G G (R) C G ~ *

G G G I H _ % G x G G%G

H % H G%G H G%G G OG G H 2G G _ Z I G n

451

G G % H G%G _ 2 G%G G G E H G H 2G
H G m OH 2G

n
G 3 H G E H G H 2 G G G G G G G G d E G G

2 C G ~ *
Y G H G L G _ G G G G G G G H G *

G G G OG GG G H

G H qH > o
a
> H 2 G G G % H G%G G~ H _ G E H

G _ G%_ G G%G G dG E G H 2G H GG G H G o

G G (R) _ I G _ m

m G

G G G _ Z G G%G G 3

L % >

o

G 3 H Y G GG G G ~ G%_
> n
G L H G (R) G OG C G ~ *

G G G G G _ G _ G > }

q o
n

G G H G G G " I _ G%G G ~G" G G!

L G G2 _ G GG G I 3GH

G o

G G a

452

G >
G G G%G3 G%G G H G % H G " Z G

_ G G G H H G " L L L H G

G H G G _ G Z G
H G O

G G k
G m m

OG H > n
G (R) E d d ~G" C G ~ *

% H G 2 G G G > n
G G H H G G G(R)G G

G OG G H G (R) _ 2 m G G I

GG H H G G G 2 m Z % H G H %
H Z _ G G G IG 3 G G E
G Z d OG G C G H

G % >

G 2 G7 G G 3 >

G I G" H H % d G G!" G IG *

G G" % G H G7 d

E $G H G G H G }

H C G I 2 d >

I 2
OG OG 2 G I C G ~ *

H 2 H 3

H G I % H 3 I G d G G G!"

G H G H G G 2 G!" q % EqG G
d m

H H G G G(R)G G H m
H G Z G G Z H H H G G I d L 2 d G IG
H G H G OI 2 % H G % G%G G

G H 3 Z OG 3 3H I G G E G n

453

G G O
G " G G Z H G "G G G G " G OG G I H G Z GG

E G E G7 I 3 d >
G 3

I G > k

G " G G G G G G IG H Z G
H I d _ Y G I G qC G3 I d G G 2 G G G G I G

Z H H G G G(R)G GO G 2 G I H G G H
H Z HI G E 2 _ H Z G HI H C G G H

2

H G ~G" I % Gd % 2 L HG" %

G G G H I 3 d .. Z I

2 G I L G G%G G G GO G _ m
G G G IG L G G O

G %3o

4 C G IG 3 G G H H d H G I

H GG H H G G%G G

G ~ *
Y Z I G G 3 G G G Z H G %

G G d H G 2 C G I >
G G!" L H H G " % G "
G G " G%G H E H d2 Z G H G7 G 3 G G

H >

G O
G G GG O G7 Z G Z G Z G Z G HH
2_ mG G2 qG G 2 3 G

G Z G H G (R) I HG G G IGG G!" G I G"

G G G G H G G HG" Y >

G G qG G L ~^ G G G I _ Z

G G G2 q G L GC q

454

E G G _ G!" qG ~G" OG G G G G7 G G~ * Y

G 3/4
G G G G O G2 G 4 H 3/4
_ m G % > G I

G G Z G G G 3 G%G

C G G" G H G Z > o

3 G 3 G G H G GG G G~G 3

G Z H Z G Z H G " GG % GG

d Z 1/2

G (R) G%GO G GG 3/4

OG G I G IG O G!" H GL H

% k
G G H G " I G GG
H Z }G Z }G E _ R) G O 3 G% 3 E _ G7 Z }G Z
GG 3 GG I H H %H %

G 3 G

G G G L G GH G G H

I H G G I % G H G L G G GG G G G G G G!

C G GG G GO G G I
_ % G I G Z G >

G% I G G G G%G G G A
G d G _ I G%G G I
G G G" G G H G " H H G%_ G G _ G

G G7 I H G G G OG G2 G Y G7 A G I G
m G
G IG E E G G Y G " % H OG H G " Z Y G " > _ G O
H G!" m % H Z G%G Y OG G I G HG" H

H G!" m R) G G 3 G G2 q G H G " I G H G "

455

OG H G I G7 _ n

G GG I H G I H G _ OG

HG(R) _ G G G G

GG G G7 H L GG _ G d G

2 _
G G" G G7 H G G G G GG G G H G H G " Z H

G G H G%G G 3 G H G " Z H _G

G%G 3H 2G G I _ E H H 2 L G 2 3 G >

G G7 H H G G OG

% G _ G%G2 G3 G " G G G 3d I G O

G L G " G G " G Z G " G O
G G G" G 2 G G I G H q H

>
Y G H _ E H G G O

G 3 _ % G H G G! % _

G >
G 2 G G G 2 G

I G G G 2 G C % H G%G G _ G
G >
I G G 2 G % H G G 2
% G H ! 2 3 G

2
G 2 G % H G% G OG G!" H H I G H
L G H G7 L G C G H I % H G 2 G G 2 G

G q G G G q G E #
E G q G I G 2 G
456

G >
G G q G H G IG G~_ I

G 3 H
H >

G >
G 2 G G G G%G G G % H G(R) G

E G G G 3d _ G7

G >

% n

C Z G G I G G H

% H G H G H G Z G

C G G OG H G " L GI _ G I

H 3/4

_ m
Y G I G G 3 G GdH G G 3d G G G % > G I G! I m E 4

G G G G % % 2 G G G G%G G G % H G" C G I % 3H 2 L

a
G 2 G

G " % G > Y G%GU

G m G 3H 2 % H L G " L _ % I G G G m >
% mG q G%G G G m G H G % H aH G C G%G G

G d H H G G H 2G G q G % G G G%G G G %

2
2 G m

2G m

G G G IG 3H 2 %H 3H C G I % e Z H
G m G >

457

G G >
G G G G(R)G Z G%G H G H G I G _ G
% H G" m >

G%G G2 G7 H G" % 3 >
G%G L _ % I Y G

OG G G 3 2 3 G G % H
G >

% H G%G3$ G % E G _ G%G
G Z G H Z G Z G Z G Z G

H G G G G!" G 2 Z

G O 3 E G >
E H O G G H G m >
m

% H 3H 2 H G % H 3 G H L G~G _ % G G G GI G H
%H G H > G G 2 HG I Y % 2 G%G G 3d G

H G GO G 2 3H

2 3 H G" 2 3H

_ % G GI Y G%G G G G 3 G2 G 2 G G L G

G H G E G d d m G

L G G O G G G d G!" > H

H * 2
Z G O Z G G! L G 2 E G_ L

G " _ d G! d G G
458

H Z G! L G 2 3 H G " G G_ G

G~G G H G E G!" I H Y

E G % 4 Z G O Z G G H I L d H G H GG O G

E 4 G7 % E 4 G7 E G E E
dG Z G Z Z H G E

Z G O Z G E Z G G G G % % H E 4 H
G G%G G G%G H G " I 2 E G G G G G!" % G L E G Z Z Z

Gx2

G%G L H G " Z G G G % H G I m G I 2G

I H E G!" I G O G G Y G E G G G G #

G_ G I G H % G E G Y H G!" % G E G E

H G 3 HG" _ G%G Y G G%G Y G7 Z G O

H G G x G!" % G 4

GG G E G G G G E 4
G dG G~G d G_ G Y G L G I I G
G G G% G " G Z G GH G G 3 G Z G 3 E G G G G " L _
G GH G d G " d _ Z {
G Y GH G _ G G H

OG 3 qG % G H E E E G G % m E G G

G~G 3 G_ G Z L G G% G G G G IG OG 3 G qGG
G H G G%G H G " I L d H E I

459

I H G G 3 I H G(R) >

H I 3 G3 E G!" E G _ I G
H G G (R) G G I L

% 4 4 Z G
G " G G G G~G 3 G_ G % 2 q G H
G GG G H HG G G G H H H _ G%G G H

% 2 % G % % H G _ E 4 C d G G G

G%G G E %H G E 4 C d G_ G H

% 2 E H G " >
C _ H G G 2 Z G

G 3/4
_ G H H G G m G G G 3/4
_ H G " m G L G G 3/4
_ G m
I G 2 G%G d H H 4 H G" E % G E G G
. *
G 2

_ G%G G H G O H G G
G H H G (R) G_ G
G 3 G _ m % G > H q
G m H G G H G O H G " G G7 G L
G *
G 3 {
G 3 I G Y C _ m H

G G7 G G H _ G%G G G G~G 3
G I IG L G $G G G~G GG H G " H G%G % G _ d G ! G%G

G E G G G Y I G L E 4 _ dG2 G%G2G G7 G G

Gd _ Y G G7 3 H G G G H G G 3 _ I
460

G G G Y $G H H H G " C _ Z {

Y Y _ G H G d H G_ G > A

H H GZ _ H d I I

E G G H H H G G G~G 3 G_ G G G G%G G G!"

% 4 Z G H G O G G 2
G G E 4 G% m Z Z G Z Z IG Z Z I Z
H E 4 G7 E 4 G!" m E 4 G!" E G LE G!"

I G I m 3 >
G G _ G G% L G 4 G" G 2 % C G

. G I

G E G Z G E 4 _G Z I GH

I C GL I Z G Z E E G GE E G G G E 4

H G G G7 C G G G 2 I H G I I G Y Z I

G >
G I G G G G G I

G I % I H H H G G I C > 2G

G H G 3/4
G G G G H G G H G >

C >

G C G G G G G >

G >

H 3

G G G G H G L {
>

% G Z G IG 3GH G G " IG O G "

H o
H G o

461

G H H G G H G%G % G H H G%G

2 3 Z G Z Z I _ G G

4 H H % 2 % H G G G G G !

! 2 3 H G _ I G Y G C 3

H G G Z H G Z Z Z
H G (R) Z Z G G Z I G

G Z G 2 E Z G H G "

L Z I 3 o

o
I G Y I G G 3 G "
3 H % G % G H _

I G L I H G (R) I G Y Z I G 3 #$

G Z G L L G% L 2 G Z G Z
E G G G % H _ Y
>

GH G I GH G C 3 G G C 3 G G C 3 I C

_ G % G 3 H H H H G G

G G H G 3 G >

G 4 H H GG C G % 2 G G H G G H G

H A
G%G3G G H H G C G o

H G I Y G IG G G % % G m G
E G G E G G!" 3 q G H G G7 H G%G G G% C m G%GO dG

G 3 G% C 3 H % 3G L Eq G E G "

G%G3G G%GO G G G 2G GL G % G 3 G

HG" _ G~ G G_ Y L G I G%G3G H G ! G H 2

462

G7 G Y H H G G7

m G _ G C 3 HG Z G #

G 2 G G GG O G G m Z G C G #

G%G Y % G " q G%G G G G G H G "

H G G H H H G Z H G " G G G G G

m

G _ E G G G G~G 3 G_ G
I m

H H H G" % Z % G H 4 % H G Z H G" G

H H H H G I G% C Z IG Z Z G3 Z G Z {
I G G " G7 I H H C 3 E H C

Z H Z E G 3 E G G G G O G H G H G%_ G G G G qG G I
G G7 H G H G G G H

When Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) came to see al-Mamun, al-Mamun ordered al-Fadl ibn
Sahl to summon the prominent theologians from among the rhetoricians such as the
Catholicos [al-jathaliq]. The Head of the Rabbis [ras al-jalut], the heads of the Sabians,
the High Priest [al-hirbidh] of Zoroaster and his followers, Castile Nestus, the Roman
medical scientist, and the rest of the theologians in order to hear their words and those
of al-Rida (AS). Al-Fadl ibn Sahl gathered them together, then informed al-Mamun
about their meeting. Al-Mamun said: Let them enter my presence.' So he did, and then
received them with hospitality.
He then introduced himself to them saying, Verily, I have gathered you for something
good, and want you to debate with this cousin of mine from medina, who has come
tome. Come to me tomorrow morning. None of you should be absent."
They said: "O Commander of the Faithful! We listen and obey you. Allah willing,, we will
be here first thing in the morning."
Al-Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Nawfali said: "We were talking to Abu al-Hasan (AS) when
Yasir, the servant who was in the charge of serving Abu al-Hasan, entered and told him,
O My Master! Verily, the Commander of the Faithful expressed his greetings to you and
said: May you brother be your ransom! Verily, the rhetoricians, scholars from all
religions, and theologians from all nations have all gathered together here with me.
Would you like to come to us and have a discussion with them? If you do not wish to
do so, do not bother yourself. However, if you prefer, we can come visit you.

463

Abu al-Hasan (AS) then saixpress my greetings to him, and tell him that I
understand what you intend. Allah willing, I will come to you myself tomorrow
morning."
Al-Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Nawfali said; "When Yasir went out, the Imam (AS) turned
to me and said: "O Nawfali! You are an Iraqi, and an Iraqi's heart is not hard. So, what
do you think? What is your cousin's intention in setting up a meeting between me and
the pagans and rhetoricians?"
Al-Nawfali says I answered, "May I be yoiur ransom! He intends to test you, and wants
to know how much knowledge you possess. Verily, he has based his assumption on
shaky grounds. By Allah, what he has set up is evil."
The Imam (AS) asked, "And what has he set up?"
Al-nawfali said:
The heretics and the theologians are different from the learned. That is because a
learned does not deny the undeniable, whereas rhetoricians, theologians, and
polytheists are people who deny things and try to prove what is not true. If you argue
with them and tell them that God is One, they would say, Confirm His Oneness.' And if
you say that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, they would say, Prove his
Prophethood.' May I be your ransom! They confuse you and make you disprove your
own proofs. They continue to falsify until you back off. Beware of them! May I be your
ransom!"
Al-Nawfali added, "The Imam (AS) then smiled, and told me, O Nawfali! Do you fear that
they will defeat my arguments?"
Al-Nawfali said: No, by Allah! I have no worries about you. Allah willing, I hope that
Allah will make you victorious over them!'
The Imam (AS) asked again, O Nawfali! Would you like to know when Al-Mamun will
regret his actions?"
He answered, Yes.'
The Imam (AS) said:
When he hears me argue with the people of the Torah quoting their own Torah, with the
people of the Gospel quoting their own Gospel with the people of the Psalms quoting
their own Psalms, with the Sabians in their own Hebrew language, with the Zoroastrian
priests in their own Persian, with the Romans in their own Latin, and with the
rhetoricians using their very own languages.
So, if I close the avenues of argument in the face of each arguing party and disprove
his claim, making him renounce his statement from its onset and referring to my own
statement, then al-Mamun will realize that he has not achieved what he aspires to
achieve. It is then that he will feel regret. And there is no power and no strength save in
Allah, the Most High, the Most Great.
On the following day, al-Fadl ibn Sahl went in a hurry to see the Imam (AS) and told
him, "May I be your ransom! Your cousin is waiting for you. The people have gathered
together. When will you go to him?"
Al-Rida (AS) told him, "You go ahead, Allah willing, I will come to you."
Then he made ablutions for praying, drank some sawiq, quenched us from it as well,
and then we all left. When we reached al-Mamun's place, the meeting was full of
people. Muhammad ibn Jafar, some of the Talibites and Hashimites, and the
Commanders of the Army were among those present.
When al-Rida (AS) entered, al-Mamun stood up, Muhammad ibn Jafar, and all the
Hashimites who were present there, also stood up for him. The Imam (AS) and alMamun sat down while all the people were still standing, until al-Mamun ordered them
to sit down. Al-Mamun talked to the Imam for a while. Then al-Mamun turned to the
Catholicos and said: "O Catholicos! This is my cousin Ali ibn Musa ibn Jafar (AS). He
464

is one of the children of Fatimah (AS), the daughter of our Prophet (SA), and Ali ibn
Abu Talib (AS). I would like you to debate with him, but be fair with him."
The Catholicos said: "O Commander of the Faithful! How can I argue with a man who
argues with me using a Book I reject, and who believes in a prophet who I do not
believe in?
Al-Rida (AS) told him, "O Christian! Will you accept to debate with me if I present proofs
from your Gospel?"
The Catholicos answered, "How could I reject the words of the Bible? I swear to God
that I will accept your arguments, even if I dislike them."
Al-Rida (AS) told him, "Ask whatever you wish, and you shall receive an answer."
The Catholicos said: "what is your opinion about the Prophethood of Jesus and his
Book? Do you deny either one of them?"
Al-Rida (AS) said:
I accept the Prophethood of Jesus. I accept his Book. And I accept what he taught his
nation, and what was accepted by his disciples. However, I reject the Prophethood of
any Jesus who has not professed the Prophethood of Muhammad, his Book, and what
he taught his people.
The Catholicos said: "Two witnesses are required to validate a testimony. Is that
correct?"
The Imam (AS) said: "Yes."
The Catholicos Archbishop said: "if that is the case, I challenge you to select who
witnesses who are neither Muslim nor Christina, but who do not reject the Prophethood
of Muhammad (SA). Likewise, you may ask a similar question from people other than
our own nation."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "O Christian! Now you are speaking fairly. Do you accept a just
person who was given preference (over others) by the Messiah, Jesus, the son of
Mary?"
The Catholicos replied, "Who is the just one? Name him for me."
The Imam (AS) said: "What is your opinion of John al-Daylami?"
The Catholicos responded, "Bravo! Bravo! You have mentioned the person most loved
by the Messiah."
The Imam (AS) said:
Then I ask you to swear by God, and tell me whether or not the Bible says that John
said: The Messiah has informed me of the religion of Muhammad, the Arab, and has
given me the glad tidings about him who will be (a Prophet) after him. Therefore, I have
the glad tidings of him to the disciples and they believed in him.'
The Catholicos said: "John did quote this from the Messiah. He did give the glad
tidings concerning the coming of a Prophet, his Household, and his Successor. He has
not specified when this would happen, and has not named them so that we could
identify them."
Al-Rida (AS) saif we bring someone here who can recite the Bible, and he recites to
you Muhammad's name, his Household, and his nation, will you believe in him?"
The Catholicos replied, "What a sound suggestion!"
Al-Rida (AS) turned to Nestus the Roman, and asked hi, "have you memorized the third
Book of the Bible?"
He answered, "I have thoroughly memorized it." Then the Imam (AS) addressed the
Catholicos and saian you recite the Bible?" The Catholicos said: "Yes, of course."
The Imam said: "Then I will recite to you (some verses from) the third Book. If
Muhammad (SA), his Household (AS), and his nation were mentioned in it, then bear
witness! And if they have not been mentioned therein, then do not bear witness."
Then the Imam (AS) recited to him some of the verses of the third Book until he reached
the reference to the Prophet. He stopped reading and said: "O Christina! I challenge
465

you to swear by the Messiah and his mother. Have you realized that I have knowledge
of the Bible?"
He replied, "yes."
The Imam (AS) recited to him some verses from the third Book concerning the
reference to the Prophet, his Household, and his nation. Then the Imam (AS) said:
O Christian! What do you think now? These are the words of Jesus, the son of Mary. If
you deny what the Bible says, then you will deny both the Jesus and Moses. If you deny
them, then it is incumbent to kill you for blasphemy against your Lord, your Prophet,
and your Book.
The Catholicos saido not deny the clear things in the Bible. On the contrary, I
profess them."
The Imam (AS) asked others who were present, "Bear witness to his profession."
Then the Imam (AS) said to the Catholicos, "O Catholicos! Ask me any other question
that you wish to ask."
The Catholicos asked, "What about the disciples of Jesus, the son of Mary? How many
were they? And tell me about the scholars of the Bible. How many were then?"
Al-Rida (AS) said:
You have found the expert! As for (the number of) the disciples, they were twelve men.
The best and the most learned of them was Aluqas (Luke). As for the (number of)
Christian scholars, there were three men: John (Yohanna), the great' at Aj, John at
Qirqisiya, and john al-Daylami at Zijan, who made reference to Prophet Muhammad, his
Household and his nation. It is he who gave glad tidings to the nation of Jesus and the
Children of Israel about him.
The Imam (AS) added, "O Christian! By Allah, we believe in Jesus, who believed in
Muhammad. We have nothing against Jesus except for his weakness and the paucity of
his fasting and prayer.
The Catholicos replied, "By Allah, you have corrupted your knowledge! You affair has
become weak! I though that you were the most learned of the Muslims!"
Al-Rida (AS) asked, "Why?"
The Catholicos said: "You said that Jesus was weak in fasting and prayer when, in fact,
he never broke fasting during the day, and never slept during the night. He always
fasted during the day, and he always prayed throughout the night."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "For whom did he fast and pray?"
The Catholicos did no answer, not knowing what to say.
Al-Rida (AS) saiwant to ask you a question."
The Catholicos said: "Ask. I will respond if I have the answer."
Al-Rida (AS) asked, "Why do you deny that Jesus gave life to the dead with the
permission of Allah, the Mighty and High?"
The Catholicos saideny that because whoever is able to give life to the dead, and
to heal the blind and the leprous is a Lord worthy of service."
Al-Rida (AS) said:
Very well. However, Elijah [al-Yasa'] performed the same miracles as Jesus did. He
walked on water, gave life to the dead, and healed the blind and the leprous Why did his
nation not adopt him as a Lord? Why did no anyone worship him as a god other than
Allah? The Prophet Ezekiel [Hizqil] did just what Jesus did. He gave life to thirty-five
men sixty years after their death.
Then the Imam (AS) turned towards the Head of the Rabbis and asked him,
O Head of the Rabbis! Do you find the following about some of the youth of the
Children of Israel in the Torah? When Nebuchadnezzar [Bakht Nasr] invaded Jerusalem,
he enslaved the Children of Israel and brought them to Babylonia. Then Allah, the
Mighty and High, sent al-Yasa from them, and he gave life to them. This is in the Torah.
No one but an unbeliever of you would deny it.
466

The Head of the Rabbis saihave heard about this and know it."
The Imam (AS) said: "You have spoken the truth."
Then the Imam (AS) said: "O Jewish man! See if I read from the following Book of the
Torah properly."
The Imam (AS) then recited some of the verses from the Torah for us. The Jewish man,
who was surprised at hearing how the Imam (AS) was reciting the Torah, kept moving
his body.
He then faced the Christian and asked, "O Christian! Were these words revealed before
Jesus or were they revealed after him?"
The Catholicos answe3red, "They were revealed before him."
Al-Rida (AS) said:
The people of Quraysh gathered around the Messenger of Allah (SA) and asked him to
give life to their dead. He sent along Ali ibn Abu Talib (AS) with them and told him, "go
to the cemetery, and loudly call the people about whom they have asked, say, "O soand-so, so-and-so, etc." Tell them, "Allah's Messenger Muhammad says, Rise with the
permission of Allah, the Mighty and High' Then they all rose and brushed off the dust
from their heads." The people from the tribe of Quraysh walked towards them and
asked them about their affairs. They told them that Muhammad (SA) has been raised as
a Prophet. The people who had risen from the dead said: "We wish we had lived in his
age and believed in him!" He healed the blind, the leprous, and the insane. He spoke
with the beasts, the birds, the jinn, and demons. Still, we do not adopt him as a Lord
other than Allah, the Mighty and High. We do not deny the miracles of the prophets.
Since you have adopted Jesus as a Lord, why do you not adopt al-Yasa and Hizqil as
lords, for they performed the same miracles as did Jesus, the son of Mary, such as
giving life to the dead?
Moreover, thousands of the Children of Israel left their homeland in fear of death due to
the plague. Allah made them die immediately. The people of the village build a fence
around them, and left them there until their bones decayed. One of the prophets of the
Children of Israel passed by, and he was amazed when he saw so may decayed bones.
Allah, the Mighty and high, revealed to him, "Would you like Me to bring them to life so
that you can admonish them?"
The Prophet said: "Yes, O Lord!" Then Allah, the Mighty and High, revealed to him,
"Then call them." He said: "O decayed bones! Rise with Allah's permission." They all
rose while brushing off the dust from their heads."
Likewise when Abraham (AS), the friend of the Most Compassionate, took the birds, cut
them into pieces, and put each piece on a mountain top. He called out to them and they
came towards him.
Also Moses (AS) the son of Imran, his companions, and seventy of the men whom he
had chosen went to the mountain. They told Moses, "You have seen Allah. So show
Him to us like you have seen Him." Moses told them, "I have not seen Him." But they
said: "We shall never believe in you until we see Allah manifestly." A thunderbolt struck
them, and burned them all up. Only Moses survived. Moses said: O my Lord! I chose
seventy men from among the Children of Israel and brought them to the mountain.
Shall I return by myself? How shall my people believe what I must tell them? If You
desired You could have destroyed al of us long before. Would you destroy us all for the
deeds of the foolish ones among us?' Then Allah, the Mighty and High, gave life to
them after their death.
You cannot deny all these things which I have told you, for the Torah, the Bible, the
Psalms and the Qur'an have mentioned them. If all those who gave life to the dead,
healed the blind, the leprous and the mad, were adopted as lords other than Allah, then
you should also adopt them as Lords. O Christians! What is your opinion?
The Catholicos said: "Yes. You are right. There is no god but Allah."
467

Then the Imam (AS) turned towards the Head of Rabbis and told him.
O Jewish man! Turn to me. Swear to me by the Ten Commandments which were sent
down to Moses, the son of Imran, that the following statement about the Prophet
Muhammad (SA) and his nation is not found in the Torah:
When the people of the last nation, who are followers of the Rider of the Camel, who
glorifies the Lord enormously, new glorification in new churches (implying mosques),
then let the Children of Israel flee towards them and their dominion so that their hearts
may be tranquil, since there will be swords in their hands with which they will take
revenge on the unbelievers around the globe.
Is this not written in the Torah?
The Head of the Rabbis said; "Yes, we have found that written in this manner."
Then the Imam (AS) asked the Catholicos, "O Christian! How is your knowledge of the
Book of Shaya?
He answered, "I know it letter by letter."
Then the Imam asked them both, "Do you know that the following statement is made by
him, O people! I have seen the picture of the Donkey. He was wearing gowns of light.
And I have seen the Rider of the Camel, who is as bright as the moon.'"
They answered, "Verily, Sha1ya did say that!"
Al-Rida (AS) said:
O Christian! Do you know that Jesus said:
I am going to my Lord and your Lord, and the Paraclete [farqilita] is coming who shall
testify to my truth just as I testified for him, and he shall explain everything to you, and
he shall be the one to expose all the sins of nations, and he shall be the one to smash
down the pillars of unbelief?'
The Catholicos said: "We accept whatever you cite from the Bible."
The Imam said: "O Catholicos! Have you found this in the Bible?"
The Catholicos said: "Yes."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "O Catholicos, when you lost the first Bible, with whom did you find
it?"
The Catholicos said: "We only lost the Bible for one day. Then we found it fresh (in its
original state). John and Matthew brought it back to us."
Al-Rida (AS) asked him,
How little you know of the Bible and its scholars! If what you say is correct, then why
do you have so many disputes between yourselves regarding the Bible? The source of
controversy lies in the Bible which you have in your hands today. Had it been the same
as the fist Bible, there would be no dispute over it, However, I will prove this for you
myself.
Know that when the first Bible was lost, the Christians gathered around their scholars
and said to them, Jesus the son of Mary has been killed, and we have lost the Bible.
You are the scholars. What do you have?' Luke, Mark and John told them, We have
memorized the Bible. Do not worry about it. Do not forsake the churches. We will recite
each Gospel of the Bible for you on each Sunday until we put it all together.' Then Luke,
Mark, John and Matthew gathered together and put together this Bible after you had
lost the first one. These four students were of the first students. Did you know that?"
The Catholicos saidid not know this before. Now I have learned it from you due to
your noble knowledge of the Bible. I heard things from you which I knew deep down,
and which my heart acknowledges to be the truth. As a result, I have grown in
understanding."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Do you accept the evidence I have presented?"
The Catholicos saicompletely accept the evidence as correct, and bear witness
that it is true."
468

Al-Rida (AS) then told al-Ma'mun, his family, and the others who were present, "Be
witnesses to this." They said: "We bear witness."
Then the Imam (AS) told the Catholicos,
I swear by the Son and his Mother to tell us whether you know that Matthew said the
following, The Messiah is the son of David, the son of Abraham, the son of Issac, the
son of Jacob, the son of Yehuda, the son of Khadrun.'
Mark said the following regarding the lineage of Jesus, the son of Mary, He is Allah's
Word placed in the human body. So it turned into the human form.'
Moreover, Luke said: Jesus the son of Mary and his mother wee humans made of flesh
and blood. Then the Holy Sprit entered into them.'
Testify as well that Jesus said the following about himself, O disciples! I will tell you
the truth. No one will ascend to Heaven, except for him who descends there from,
except for the Rider of the Camel, the Seal of the Prophets, for he will ascend to the
Heavens, and then will descend therefrom.
What do you have to say about that?
The Catholicos said; "These are the words of Jesus. We do not deny them."
Al-Rida (AS) saif so, what do you say about the testimonies of Luke, Mark and
Matthew regarding Jesus and the lineage they attributed to him?"
The Catholicos said: "They ascribed likes to Jesus."
Al-Rida (A) said: "O people! Did he not just bear witness that they (Luke, Mark and
Matthew) are the Scholars of the Bible, and what they said was the truth?"
The Catholicos said: "O Scholar of the Muslims! I would like you to excuse me from
discussing about these men."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Fine, I will excuse you from that, O Christian! Ask me whatever you
wish to ask."
The Catholicos saiet someone else ask you questions. By Jesus, I did not think
that there was a scholar like you among the Muslims."
Al-Rida (AS) turned towards the Head of the Rabbis and said: "Will you ask me
questions or should I ask?"
The Head of the Rabbis saiwill ask. However, I will not accept any proofs from you
except those form the Torah, the Bible, the Psalms of David, or the Scriptures of
Abraham and Moses."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Do not accept any of my proofs unless they are from the Torah as
expressed by Moses, the son of Imran, the Bible as expressed by Jesus, the son of
Mary, or the Psalms of David as expressed by David."
The Head of the Rabbis saiow can you prove the Prophethood of Muhammad

Al-Rida (AS) said: "Moses, the son of Imran, Jesus, the son of Mary and David, the
Vicegerent of Allah on the Earth, have testified to his Prophethood."
The Head of the Rabbis said: "Provide evidence of the testimony of Moses, the son of
Imran."
Al-Rida (AS) told him,
O Jewish man! Do you know that Moses said the following to the Children of Israel, A
prophet will come to you fro among your brethren. Believe in him, and obey him.'
Do you know that the Children of Israel have no brethren other than the Children of
Ishamel? Do you know about the ties of kinship between Israel and Ishmael and the
relationship that existed between them from the past through Abraham?
The Head of the Rabbis said: "These are the words of Moses. I do not deny them."
Al-Rida (AS) asked him, "Has any Prophet other than Muhammad (SA) come from
among the brethren of the Children of Israel?"
He replied, "No."
Al-Rida (AS) sais this not correct in your opinion?"
469

The Head of the Rabbis said: "Yes, but I want you to prove its correctness from the
Torah."
Al-Rida (AS) asked him, "Do you deny that the Toray says the following to you? There
came light from Mount Sinai. Light shined upon us from Mount Sair and it became
apparent to us from Mount Faran.'"
The Head of the Rabbis saiam familiar with these words, but I do not know what
they mean."
Al-Rida (AS) said:
I will inform you about them. What is meant when it says There came light from Mount
Sinai is a reference to the revelations of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, to Moses on
mount Sinai.
And what is meant when it says, Light shined upon us from Mount Sair' is a reference
to the mountain upon which Allah, the Mighty and High, sent revelations of Jesus, the
son of Mary. Jesus was on that mountain.
And what is meant when it says, and it became apparent to us from Mount Faran.'
Faran is a mountain that is one day away from Mecca. As you and your friends said: the
Prophet Shaya has said in the Torah that I have seen the picture of the Rider of the
Donkey. He was wearing gowns of light. And I have seen the Rider of the Camel, who is
as bright as the moon.' Who is the Rider of the Donkey? Who is the Rider of the Camel?
The Head of the Rabbis saido not know who they are."
The Imam (AS) said: "The Rider of the Donkey is Jesus, and the Rider of the Camel is
Muhammad (SA). Do you deny that this is from the Torah?"
The Head of the Rabbis said: "No, I do not deny that."
Then al-Rida (AS) said: "Do you know the Prophet Hayqua?"
The Head of the Rabbis said: "Yes, I know him."
The Imam (AS) said:
He said the following which your Book has also stated,
Allah brought down the Bayan from Mount Faran. The heavens are filled with the
praise of Ahmad and his nation. He will lead his troops at sea just as he carries them on
land. He will bring us a new Book after the destruction of the Holy House (in
Jerusalem).'
Did you know the, and do you believe in it?
The Head of the Rabbis sain fact, the Prophet Hayquq has said this. I will not deny
his words.
Al-Rida (AS) said:
David said in his Psalms which you have also read, O my Allah! Appoint him who will
establish the practice after the cessation (of the prophets). Did you know of any
prophet other than Muhammad (SA) who has established the practice after the end of
the period of prophecy?
The Head of the Rabbis said: "this is what David said. We do not deny it. However, he
was referring to Jesus, as it was with him that the age of prophecy came to a close."
Al-Rida (AS) told him,
You are wrong. In fact, Jesus endorsed the practices [sunah] of the Torah until Allah
raised him up to Himself. It is written in the Bible.
The son of the pious woman will go, and the Paraclete will come after him. It is he who
will preserve the bonds, explain everything to you, and testify to my truth just as I
testified for him. I have brought you the examples, and he will bring you the
interpretations.
Do you believe that this statement is in the Bible?
The Head of the Rabbis said: "Yes."
Al-Rida (AS) replied to him, "O the Head of the Rabbis! I want to ask you about your
Prophet Moses."
470

The Jewish man saie brought miracles which the prophets before him had not
brought."
The Imam (AS) asked, "Could you give me an example?"
The Head of the Rabbis replied, "He split the sea, turned the cane into a slithering
serpent, made springs gush from stones, showed his hand white and shining to the
onlookers, and other signs the like of which other creatures were unable to bring."
Al-Rida (AS) replied to him, "You are right. They are proofs of his Prophethood. He
brought the like of which other creatures were unable to brig. Is it obligatory on you to
believe in whoever claims Prophethood, and performs something which all other
creatures are unable to perform?"
The head of the Rabbis said: "No, since there is no one like Moses considering his
position near his Lord and his closeness to Him. It is not incumbent upon us to profess
the Prophethood of whoever claims it, unless he brings us miracles similar to those
brought by Moses.
The Imam (AS) said:
Then how come you admit the Prophethood of the other prophets who preceded Moses
who did not split the sea; nor did they make twelve springs gush forth from the stones,
nor did they show a white shining hand as Moses did, nor did they turn the came into a
slithering serpent.
The Jewish man replied:
I told you that if they performed miracles as evidence for their Prophethood which all
other creatures were unable to perform, and if they brought something the like of which
Moses had brought, or they followed what Moses had brought, then it is incumbent
upon us to believe in them.
Al-Rida (AS) replied to him, "O Head of the Rabbis! What has prevented you from
professing (the Prophethood of) Jesus, the son of Mary? Jesus brought the dead to life,
healed the blind and the leprous, made birds formed of clay and breathed life into them
with Allah's permission.'"
The Head of the Rabbis sait is said that he did that but we did not see it."
Al-Rida (AS) saiave you seen the miracles performed by Moses? Have you not
received the news by way of Moses's closest trustworthy companions who said he did
them?"
The Head of the Rabbis said: "Yes. That is so."
The Imam (AS) said: "Well. The news about the miracles of Jesus, the son of Mary, have
reached you in a similar fashion. Why then did you acknowledge Moses and believe in
him, but you did not believe in Jesus?"
The Head of the Rabbis did not answer.
Al-Rida (AS) said:
The same is true about Muhammad (SA) and his miracles. The same is true about any
other prophet (AS) appointed by Allah. One of the miracles of Muhammad (SA) was that
he was a poor hired shepherd. He had not been taught anything. He did not have any
teachers. However, the Qur'an which he brought contains the stories of the prophets
and the associated news letter by letter. It has narrated news of the past, and the things
to come in the future all the way up until the Day of Resurrection. The Qur'an provided
information about what people did in hiding or in their homes. The Prophet brought
innumerable miracles.
The Head of the Rabbis said: "Neither the account about Jesus nor that about
Muhammad (SA) is considered correct by us. It is not permissible to admit their
Prophethood through what is not correct."
Al-Rida (AS saias the witness who testified for Jesus (AS) and Muhammad (SA)
then given false testimony?"
The Head of the Rabbis did not answer him.
471

Then the Imam (AS) called the Zoroastrian High Priest. Al-Rida (AS) said to him, "Let
me know about Zoroaster who considered himself to be a prophet. What is your proof
of his Prophethood?"
The Zoroastrian High Priest saie performed miracles which no one ever had
performed before him. Of course, I have not seen him, but the stories of our ancestors
tell us that he made legitimate for us things which others had not made legitimate.
Therefore, we follow him."
The Imam (AS) asked, "You believed in the stories which came to you about him, so
you followed him, did you not?"
He replied, "Yes."
The Imam (AS) said:
This is the case with all other nations. Stories came to them about what the prophets
had accomplished, and what Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad (AS) had all brought to
them. So why did you not believe in any of these prophets, having believed in Zoroaster
through the stories that came to you about him saying that he brought forth what
others did not?
The Zoroastrian High Priest froze in his place. Then al-Rida (AS) said: "O people! If any
of you is opposed to Islam, and wants to ask me any questions, then they should ask
me and not be shy."
Imran the Sabian, who was an expert in theology, stood up and said:
O Scholar of the people! I would not have asked you any questions if you had not
invited me to ask. I have been to Kufa, Basra, Syria, and Algeria. There I have met many
theologians. However, none of them have been able to establish for me the proof that
there is One who has no second other than Him, and that he is One Sole Being. Will you
permit me to ask you this question?
Al-Rida (AS) saif Imran the Sabian is present among the people here, it must be
you."
He said: "Yes. It is I."
The Imam (AS) said: "O Imran! Ask, but I advise you to be fair. Avoid vain talk and
nonsense."
Imran said: "My Master! By Allah, I just want you to prove something which I can
adhere to for me. Then I need not seek anything else."
The Imam (AS) said: "Ask whatever you wish to ask."
The crowds moved closer to Imran and crowded in on him.
Imran the Sabian asked, "let me know of the first thing and what it created."
Al-Rida (AS) replied to him.
You asked. Now try to understand. As for the One. He has always been One Being. He
has no limits nor does He have transient qualities. He will always remain so. Then,
without precedence, He created a different creature with transient qualities and various
different limits. He neither places it in anything, not did He limit it by anything. He
neither created it like anything, nor did He create other things like it. He then created
the creatures in various shapes: pure and impure, different and alike, with various
colors, flavors and tastes. He did not create them out of a need for them, nor did He
create them to attain a higher rank. He did not sense any increase or decrease in
Himself due to this creation. O Imran! Do you understand this?
Imran said: "By Allah, yes my Master!"
The Imam (AS) added,
O Imran! Know that if He had created what He created due to His need for them, then
He would have only created things by which He could fulfill His need. In that case, it
would have been better for Him to create several times more than what He created,
since the more the helpers there were, the more powerful their master would be.
472

O Imran! In that case, His need would be a never-ending one. The more He would crate,
the more newer needs would appear for Him. That is why we say that He did not create
the creatures out of need. Through creation He transfers the needs of some of them to
others. And He makes some of them nobler than others without any need of the nobler
one or without wanting to take any revenge against those whom He had abased. That is
how He has created.
Imran asked, "My Master! Was the Being known to Himself by His Own Self?"
Al-Rida (AS) said:
Knowledge of something is required to distinguish it from other things, and to prove its
existence through what is negated about it. However, there was nothing else there to
oppose Him to make it necessary to negate. Since there was only Him, there was no
need to establish limits. O Imran Do you understand?
Imran said: "Yes, by Allah, my Master! Then tell me: Through what means did He come
to know what He knew. Was it done by conscience or by something else?"
Al-Rida (AS) saif His Knowledge was acquired through conscience. Can we place
any limit to His Conscience, which will end in recognition?
Imran answered, "there is no way out."
The Imam (AS) then asked him, "Then what is that conscience?"
Imran could not provide any answer.
Al-Rida (AS) said:
Never mind. O Imran! If I now ask you about that conscience and whether you can
recognize it through another conscience, an you answer in the affirmative, have you not
then disproved your own statement and claim?
O Imran! Is it not more proper for you to know that the One cannot be described by a
conscience? And that the most that can be said about Him is that He has done
something, or created something? He is not such that one can conceive any directions
or parts for Him as can be imagined for the creatures and their parts. Understand this
and base your proper knowledge on it.
Imran asked, "O my Master! Can you let me know what types of limits His creatures
have? What are their meanings? And how many varieties of creatures has He created?"
The Imam (AS) said:
You asked. Now understand. In fact, there are six types of limits for His Creatures.
These are the unsubtle; the weighable; the visible; those that have no weight, that is,
the spirit; those that are visible but are without any weight, are untouchable, subtle,
colorless, and tasteless; and the measurable that are the widths, the forms, width and
height. Included among them are deeds and movements which make things, act upon
them, change them from one state to another, increase them or reduce them. As for
deeds and movements, they pass by since they have no more time than that which is
ordained for their need. Whenever a deed is finished and the movement is stopped it
ends, but its effects remain just like talking, which ends but its effect remains.
Imran said: "O my Master! Will you let me know about the Creator? If He is One, there
is nothing other than Him, and there is nothing with Him, has He not changed (His
Essence) by creating the creatures?"
Al-Rida (AS) told him, "The Mighty and High does not change through the creation of
creatures. The creatures, however, change, due to the changes He has subjected them
to."
Imran asked, "O my Master! By means of what can we recognize Him>"
Al-Rida (AS) said: "By means of other than Him."
Imran asked, "What is other than Him,"
Al-Rida (AS) saiis Will, His Name, His Attribute, and everything else that was
created, has emerged and is managed (by Him)."
Imran said: "O my Master! Then what is He?"
473

The Imam (AS) replied, "He is Light. That means that He guided His Creatures from
among the inhabitants of the heavens and the earth. You have no rights incumbent
upon me more than my professing His Unity to you."
Imran said: "O my Master! Was He not silent before creating the creatures, and then He
spoke?"
Al-Rida (AS) said:
Silence doe not exist unless there is some utterance before it. An example of this is that
it is not said that the lamp is silent and does not utter; not is it said that the lamp
shines, implying that it want to do something to us. The light shining from the lamp is
not considered to be the act of the lamp. It is not something separate from the lamp.
Therefore, when it is illuminating us we say that it was lit for us, by which we found our
way around. Through this example you can find what you are after and become
enlightened in your affairs.
Imran said: "O my Master! I though that the Ever-Existent changed His State through
the act of creation."
Al-Rida (AS) said:
O Imran! You claim that the Ever-Existent Being can change in some way as a result of
His Action. O Imran! Have you ever seen that the changes in fire change it? Have you
ever seen heat burn itself? Have you ever seen an eye see itself?
Imran said: "No, I have not. O my Master! Will you let me know whether He is in the
creatures or the creatures are in Him?"
Al-Rida (AS) said:
O Imran! He is greater than that. He is not in the creatures; not are the creatures in
Him. He is Exalted above that. I will teach you what you do not know. There is no power
and no strength save Allah. Tell me about the mirror: are you in it or is it in you? O
Imran! If neither one of you are in the other; then, how can you see your reflection in
it?
Imran said; "Through the light between me and the mirror."
Al-Rida (AS) saian you see more light in the mirror than what you perceive with
your own eyes?"
He answered, "Yes."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Then show it to us!"
It was then that the man was too baffled to say a word.
The Imam (AS) saido not see the light except that it leads to both of you, the mirror
and yourself, without being in either one of you. There are many more examples which
the ignorant simply cannot comprehend. Allah is the highest such example."
Then the Imam (AS) turned to al-Mamun and told him, "It is time to pray."
Imran said: "O my Master! Do not interrupt my questions since I am feeling inclined
towards you in my heart."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "We will pray and come back."
Then the Imam (AS) stood up. Al-Mamun got up as well. Al-Rida (AS) prayed inside and
the people prayed outside, led by Muhammad ibn Jafar. Then the Imam (AS) came out,
returned to the meeting called out to Imran, and said: "O Imran! Ask your questions."
Imran said: "O my Master! Will you let me know whether the Unity of Allah, the Mighty
and High, is perceived through reality or through description?"
Al-Rida (AS) said:
Certainly, Allah is the Only Initiator and the first Ever-Being. He has always been One
without anything to accompany Him. He is the Peerless, and there is no second with
Him. He is neither definite nor indefinite. He is neither decisive nor allegorical. He is
neither mentioned nor forgotten. No name can describe Him. Time cannot measure His
beginning. And time cannot measure His End. He has not been standing upon anything
else, nor will He be standing upon anything. There is nothing which supports Him.
474

There is nothing on which He leans. He has all these attributes before creating
anything, when there was nothing but Him. Whatever you attribute to Him will be
originated attributes which are the only means for understanding Him, which anyone
possessing understanding can comprehend.
Know that innovation, will, and intent are different words that express the same
meaning. His foremost innovation, intent and will were the letters which He established
as the origin of everything, the evidence for all perceived things, and the separator for
all vague things. Everything was separated by these letters; thing such as the names
for right and wrong, action and object, meaning and meaningless. All affairs were run
based on them. He did not establish any limited meaning for them other than what they
were themselves when He originated the letters. He did not establish for them any
existence other than themselves since they were originated via innovation.
Light is Allah's first action. He is the Light of the heavens and the earth. It was through
that action that the letters became object. They are the letters upon which speech is
based. Expressions are all from Allah, the Mighty and High, who taught them to His
Creatures.
There are thirty-three letters. Twenty-eight of them are the letters on which the Arabic
language is based. Twenty-two of Twenty-eight letters show the letters of the Assyrian
and Hebrew languages. Five of them were separated, and are in the rest of the
languages of non-Arabs in the regions. These are the five letters which were separated
from the twenty-eight letters. Therefore, there are thirty-three letters. It is not
permissible to mention more about them than what we have mentioned regarding these
fie letters which were separated.
He then established the letters after counting them and numbering them as His own
action, like the Word of the Mighty and High: Be,' and it is. Here be' refers to His
Creation, and what is created' refers to the creature. Thus, the first creation by Allah,
the Mighty and High, is innovation which has neither weight nor any movement. It is
neither heard nor does it have color or touch.
And the second thing that was created are the letters which have neither weight nor
color. They are neither heard nor described. They are not visible. The third creature
includes all the various kinds of things which are perceptible, touchable, tasteable, and
visible. Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, existed before innovation as there has been
nothing before the Mighty and High, and nothing with him. Innovation was created
before the letters were created, and the letters do not indicate anything other than
themselves.
Al-Mamun asked, "How come they do not indicate anything other than themselves?"
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Verily, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, never combines any of them
together unless to mean something, When He combines several letters together, say
four, five or six or more, He uses them to originate a new meaning which did not exist
before."
Imran asked, "How can we understand them?"
Al-Rida (AS) said:
This is how it can be understood. When you only want to refer to the letters and not
anything else, you mention them one by one and say, a b c d ... to the end. Here you
find no meaning in them other than themselves. But when you put several letters
together y construct names and attributes for a meaning which you have in mind. They
will not demonstrate the meaning for which they were intended. Did you understand
this?
Imran said: "Yes."
Al-Rida (AS) said:
Know that an attribute cannot be without what it describes. Also, a name cannot be
without a meaning. A limit cannot be without the limited. All attributes and names
475

indicate perfection and existence. They do not indicate encompassment, as the limits
do. Limits make squares, make triangles, and make hexagons.
Verily, the recognition of Allah, the Mighty and High, is perceived by attributes and
names, not by limits such as length, width, smallness, largeness, color, weight, and the
like. No such limits are applicable to Allah, the High and the All-Holy, so that His
creatures could recognize Him by recognizing themselves. This is certain as I said: but
the attributes of Allah, the Mighty and High, prove Him. He can be understood through
His Names. He can be reasoned upon by referring to His creatures.
A true seeker doe not need to see Him with his own eyes, hear Him with his own ears,
touch Him with his own hands, or encompass Him with his own heart. Were it not the
case that His attributes proved Him, Exalted is His Praise, and His Names denoted Him,
it was not possible for the taught knowledge of the creatures to perceive Him. Then the
creatures would have worshipped His Names and Attributes instead of His meaning.
Were it any different, the only worshipped one would have been other than Allah, the
Exalted, since his Attributes and Names are other than Him. Did you understand?"
Imran said: "Yes, my Master, Please tell me more."
Al-Rida (AS) said:
Beware of the saying of the ignorant ones, those whose hearts are blind, and who are in
loss. They are those who claim that Allah, the Mighty and High and the All-Holy, is
present in the hereafter for the Reckoning concerning rewards and punishments, but
He is not present in this world for the acts of obedience and hope.'
If it were that Allah, the Mighty and High's, presence was a source of His being
defective in this world. He would not be present in the Hereafter either. However, these
people have gone astray and have become blind and deaf towards the truth regarding
what they do not know. That is the Word of the Mighty and High: But whosoever is blind
in this (world), he shall also be blind in the Hereafter, and more erring from the way, i.e.
blindness from existing realities.
Intellectuals know that reasoning about what exists in the Hereafter is only possible
through what exists in this world. Whoever tries to adopt knowledge of that world
based upon his own personal views, and seek its existence, or tries to perceive it
through his own soul and not through anything else would only get more distant from
the facts about that world. That is because Allah, the Mighty and High, has given the
knowledge of that world to a special group of people who think, know, and understand.
Imran asked, "O My Master, please inform me: Is innovation a created being or not?"
Imam al-Rida (AS) answered,
It is still creation which cannot be perceived through stillness. It is a created being
since it has emerged. And it is Allah who made it emerged. Thus, it has become a
creature. In other words, there only exist Allah, the Mighty and High, and His Creatures.
There exists no third thing in between, and there is no third thing other than them.
Whatever Allah, the Mighty and High, creates dos not disobey from being His Creature.
What is crated is ether still, moving, different, harmonious, known, or ambiguous.
Whatever is bounded is the creature of Allah, the Mighty and High.
Moreover, know that all the things which the senses find for you are meanings
perceived by the senses, and every sense demonstrates what Allah, the Mighty and
High, has placed in its perception, and the heart understands all of that. Know that the
One who is Ever-Standing without any ordination or bounds created creatures ordained
by bounds and ordination. What He created were two creatures: the ordination and the
ordained. Neither one had any color, taste or weight. He established one as the means
of perceived the other and made them such that they could be perceived on their own.
He did not create anything which could stand alone relying only on itself, so as to
provide a means for arguing about and proving His Existence.
476

Thus, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, is Peerless and One. There is no second to
support Him in order to enable Him to stand, or to assist Him or protect Him. However,
the creatures support one another through the permission and will of Allah. People
have differences of opinion over this subject to the extent that they have gone astray,
become perplexed, and seek salvation from darkness by means of darkness through
describing Allah using their own qualities. In this way, they have strayed far from the
truth.
Had they described Allah, the Mighty and High, using His Attributes, and described the
creatures with the qualities of the creatures, they would have spoken through
understanding and certitude and would not have come up with so many differences of
opinion over Him. Since they sought what would perplex them, they entrapped
themselves and became confused. Allah guides whomsoever He wills to the Straight
Path.
Imran said: "O my Master! I bear witness that He is just as you have described.
However, I still have one more question to ask."
The Imam (AS) said: "Ask whatever you wish to ask."
Imran saiwant to ask you what the All-Wise is contained in. Has anything
encompassed Him? Does He change from one state to another? Is He in need of
anything?"
Al-Rida (AS) said:
O Imran! I will tell you, so understand. The one whom you question is the most
ambiguous issue which the creatures face. As for those who are deficient in
understanding, they do not recognize Him. As for those who are just and can reason,
they are not incapable of understanding Him. First of all, if He had created the creatures
due to need, then it would be proper to say that He changes His location to the location
of what He creates because of His need for them.
However, the Mighty and High, has not created anything out of need. He is always
stable, neither in something, nor on something. However, it is the creatures which hold
each other, enter into one another, and leave one another. Allah, the Mighty and High
and the All-Holy, holds all of that by his Might. He does not enter anything and does not
leave anything. Its preservation does not tire Him, nor is He incapable of holding it.
None of the creatures know how that is, except for Allah, the Mighty and high, and His
Messengers, the people who know His Secrets, those who run the affairs, and His
Guardians who carry out His laws. In fact, His command is like the twinkling of an eye,
or even closer that that. If He wills a thing, He only says to it Be,' and it is, according to
His Will and Intent. Nothing that he has created is closer to Him than any other thing,
nor is He father away from anything than another. O Imran Have you understood?
Imran said: "Yes, my Master. I have understood. I bear witness that Allah is as you
described Him to be and as you have described His Unity. I also bear witness that
Muhammad is His Servant, who is appointed to guide and lead to the right religion."
He then faced the direction of Mecca, and fell into prostration.
Al-Hasan ibn Muhammad al-Nawfali said:
When the other rhetoricians heard what Imran the Sabian said, who was very hard to
defeat in arguments and no one had ever defeated him before in arguments, not of
them dared approach al-Rida (AS), and they asked him no more questions. It became
nightfall. Then al-Mamun and al-Rida stood up, went inside and the people left.
I was sitting alone with some of my friends when Muhammad ibn Jafar called me in. I
went to see him. He asked me, "O Nawfali! Did you see what your friend (the Imam)

Al-Nawfali replied, "No, by Allah! I did not think that Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) could
plumb such depths. We did not know him in this way. He never spoke about theology in
Medina, and theologians never gathered around him."

I further said: "The pilgrims used to come to him and ask him about the lawful and the
unlawful and he answered them. Sometimes rhetoricians came to him and argued with
him."
Muhammad ibn Jafar said: "O Abu Muhammad, I fear that this man (al-Mamun) will
envy him, poison him or inure him. So advise him to refrain from these things."
Al-Nawfali added, "He will not listen to me. This man (al-Mamun) only intended to test
him to see whether he possesses the knowledge of his forefathers."
He said to me, "Tell him that his uncle does not like him to do such things, and wants
him to stop them for different characteristics."
When we returned to Al-Rida's house, I related to him the message from his uncle. Then
the Imam smiled and said: "May Allah protect my uncle. I know him well. Why is he
upset? Young man! Go to Imran the Sabian, and bring him here."
I said: "May I be your ransom! I know where he is. He is with some of the Shiite
brethren."
The Imam (AS) said: "Do not worry. Get a horse for him to ride on, and bring him here."
I went and brought Imran. The Imam welcomed him, and asked for a robe of honor
which he (AS) put on Imran. The Imam also gave him a horse, and asked for ten
thousand dinars which he (AS) donated to Imran.
Imran said: "May I be your ransom! You have followed in the footsteps of your
grandfather, the Commander of the Faithful (AS)."
The Imam (AS) said: "We prefer this." Then the Imam (AS) ordered dinner, had me sit
on his right side, and had Imran sit on his left side. After eating dinner, the Imam (AS)
told Imran, "Go now and come back in the morning. Then I will give you food from
medina."
From then do many people came to Imran to debate. He used to respond to their
arguments and disprove them until they left. Al-Mamun granted him ten thousand
dirhams. Al-Fadl also gave him some money. Then he appointed him as the director
over the alms in (the city of) Balkh where he attained much good.

478

Chapter Sixty-Six: Majlis al-Rida maa Sulayman al-Marwazi
Mutakallim Khursan `indda al-Mamun fi al-Tawhid. A Session of alRida (AS) with Sulayman al-Marwazi, the Theologian of Khurasan, in
the Presece of al-Mamun concerning the Subject of Divine Unity. - 1
tradition

1. Abu Muhammad Jafar ibn Ali ibn Ahmad the Jurist (RA) said: Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Sadaqah al-Qummi reported to us that Abu Amr Muhammad ibn
Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz al-Ansari al-Kajji related to me that one who heard from al-Hasan ibn
Muhammad al-Nawfali related to me that

H G a_ H G " % H % % o

G G G G " G % qC G G G G H G
G G E G G G E G7 G G G7 % G d o

H G " G G 3H G G G G G" L I H H G" d G% G G G H G "G

% G GG G 2 E G E H %

G G G G _ G!" d % H [ ]

G G~ H G G I L G " G H 3

Ge L H H G d G~ d G G G

Ge G H G " GG G L H H %G 2 % H L G

G 2 G

H G H E G G G > E

E 4 _ G7 _ G G a

G 3 G 2 n

479

G G G GdG O3 GC G G G
d G H G G Gc I G C E H G 3d G 2 G7 G G G G LG

o
m H H G 2 G > n

m Gm H 2 G H H m Z

E G G G Y G m m G G7 G H m
G >

G H m H H m G I

H G " I _ m H G " G G G
H H m
G 2 G L Y G O$ Z G%G L
E G G7 H G "G G G E H

% H Z G 2 G G H G " % m Z Z Z G G G H H H G " % H G

G G G G! % G 3 qGC % m G%_ G GL G G % % GO

H I E G L I H G%_ G G H H G

G H G%G O$ G G~ _ G L G G~ G GG 3 o
3 d G!" G%_ ~ G [Z ] G G%GO G G E G G!" I H H H G "

G m H G _ _ G 3/4

L Y ~ % G d G [Z ] GLO G _ G H G G!" H H I d G G
H H H I d C G ~ HG" _ C G H G Z G G G7 > G
G7 I L 2 G!" L H
m H
m G % G d d 2 L
m G L I GL G G GG

G 2

G d Z L G G G G IG L H H Z G G

G m G 2 G
H n

IG H H _ m G _ L G E 4 _ G7 G G G~G 3
480

G I G H G 3 G H E G E(c)
E >
G G Z Z G G H G " G~ G G L G L G I G

_ m I G _ m ! 2 3
G % % GO % Y _ % H G(R) % % GO % H % % GO

m m % G #

_ m % G _ m G%G G Z G% G

G " G%G _ 2 GO n
G GG G G d G m L G 2
G Y G G G G G G H G d

E G E I G Z G Z G G H _ d G_

L L % H G L GL H G" _ E G E G
Z G % H G(R) E G E G G G G GG L I H G I G G %HG
G I _ LC 2 Z % LH 2 Y %3 G (R)
G Y G G m % G d G%G

_ % H G(R) G % _ H G H G G 3

% Y % 3 G (R) _ % G % G % G *
% G % H % G % 3 G "

% Y G % Y H G" G G 2 G G
Y Z G Z G Z G Z

H _ G % d G G%G3 G (R)G G
G%G3 G (R)G G G "

481

G~G G L G Z d d _ H Y G%G

G m
I m G
G m
I m G
G m
I m G
_ 3 G

G 2 G H G G 2

G 2
H G m % G G L G G 4
H G E G G G G H d

G 2 G
G " *
I m
G7 G H H m _ H Z {
m m G

G (R) Y G G % H H H G Y
G G7 d G I G%G G
H G " 4 % G 2 H

G IG G G % G G % G G L G % H G%G G G7

!
2 G IG m G IG G % G G G " G G m G "
o
H G I G % H G % m L H G" Z G2 Z G

H G H G m % H G I G%G G Y G EqG G G G % G _ Z G Y I
G Z H L G Y H G%G G G7 H H G I % m

I E E .E G E I G H E Z GH G G H H

L _ I m G m H H

I G m
G IG G Z G" _ G I % m I E G %

H m

G G H m G k

G G G G~G 3 _ H Z {
G E E .E G E I G
482

% E G G L % H G H G G G G I E G G I G

E G7 H H H H G " G IG
G " E H E Y G " E G E G G Eq G E E{ E

3 3 H H G G " H G " H H G
G 3 G 3 G 3
d3 q 3 >
H I H G" C I G I G G }
G G *
G 2 G
3 G
H G G~G d Z G G!" L _

G 2 G

Z H G Z H G G G H G" % E G L Z H G Z H Y

3 G G xG x G G G x G G x H G Z G _ m

Y G *
G 2 G G G G G " Z G G G " G "
G I H G" G G " Z G G *

G G I H G" G G G G *
G 2 G
2
_ I m % H G 3 % G H G Y G

G%G3 G (R)G G (R) 3 3 G (R)G C G ~ #

G % H G G G m Z H H G G G~G 3

G % H G GZ % G 4 G I G H G "
Z G " G (R) Y % Z G "

Z G " G % H G G % H G" G ! G%G H % Y

G H G G H 3 d G G _ 3 _ G

G G G G I H G % Y

G G I H L H G" Z G H G " G
483

G E G E G7 Z G Z G Z H G
G G I H H _ 3 _ G%G3G G G G H G " L d G3 d
Z G L G " G _ 3 % G G%G3G

Z G " Z H G " _ . Z G 3 G%G3G G
G G G % G % G L G _ . Z G

H I H 3 G_ G ! G
G G *
G 2 G
_ _ H L G"G G G7 C H d
H I H 3 H 3 Z H I % d G %

G E G Z G G G~G d _ G G *
G 2

G (R) _ Y G Z I _ >

G G " G G " G G " G G G " L Z G Z
H Z G % 3 G " L G " >

G d G7 G I % H G " G

_ G G % Y _ m G G % Y H _ G%GO G I H G(R)

% Y G%G _ m G % _
% G % 3 G " H G G%GO G G H Z 2 G " G " %H Z 2 G "

H H % G Z G m % G %3 G " H

%HG Z G%G q G%G q
m I G" G H G H G G
484

G I _ Z G%G G G G

G%G G x G G% G % H G G H G"

G C G L G 2 m H H m

>
Z Y G " H Z Z Y G " G Z Y G " H m _

G7 G G G O L_ I Z Y G " H m G" _ Z G G I H m

%H m R) G L G E G E

>
Z Y G " H m % H G" L 3 L G _ >
G >

G G G G G G (R) I G Z

G _ L G H G " G! H G(R)

H m

m I I G I L L G " I
H G >
G G G " G G H H G L _ G

4 G %H m % H Z % m G " G
H G Z 32 G" G Y %
_ % 4 G % H m G

d Z G" % G L d Y L

_ H G ! % 2G 3 C G m G2 G G G
H m

G G m H H _ G H G (R) G ! _
485

G I G G H G H G G ! 2 3 % H G G G H Z
a
E G G G G d Y G%G3 G G%G q

. }

Sulayman al-Marwazi, the theologian in Khurasan went to see al-Mamun. He honored
him, granted him gifts and said: "My cousin Ali ibn Musa al-Rida (AS) has come here
from Hejaz. He likes theology and theologians. Thus, it would not be any trouble if you
came on the Day of Tarwiyah to have a debate with him."
Sulayman said: "O Commander of the Faithful! I dislike questioning him in your session
and among a group of Hashimites. The people will regard him as incapable when he
debates with me on theology. Incapabilities are not permissible for him."
Al-Mamun saihave invited you because of my recognition of your strength. I have
no intentions except for you t silence him in an argument."
Sulayman said: "O Commander of the Faithful! I will do it for you. Just bring us
together, sit down, and watch."
Then al-Mamun sent someone after al-Rida (AS) and said: "A man from Marw who has
no equal in Khurasan in theology has come, and asked for you to come to us. Come
here if you do not mind."
The Imam (AS) made ablution and told us to go ahead. Imran the Sabian was with us.
We went until we arrived at al-Mamun's court. Yasir and Khalid took me by the hand,
and led me in to al-Mamun. When I greeted him, he asked, "Where is my brother Abu alHasan? May Allah keep him alive!"
I said: "When we were coming he was putting on his clothes. He ordered us to go
ahead." Then I added, "O Commander of the Faithful! Your servant Imran is also with
me. He is right outside." He asked, "Who is Imran?"
I answered, "He is the Sabian who became a Muslim because of you."
He saiet him in." Then Imran came in. Al-Mamun welcomed him, and then told
him, "O Imran! You joined the Hashimites before your death!"
Imran said: "O Commander of the Faithful! Praise be to Allah who honored me by you."
Al-Mamun said: "O Imran! This is Sulayman al-Marwazi, who is the theologian from
Khurasan."
Imran said: "O Commander of the Faithful! He thinks that he is the only one in
Khurasan versed in theoretical principles, and he refutes appearance [bada]."
Al-Mamun said: "Why do you not debate with him?"
Imran said: "This depends on him."
Then al-Rida (AS) came in and asked, "What were you discussing?"
Imran said: "O son of the Prophet of Allah! This is Sulayman al-Marwazi."
Sulayman said to Imran. "Will you be pleased with Abu al-Hasan and what he says
about appearance."
Imran said: "Yes. I will, if he presents argument like those I can present when I debate
with other theologians like myself."
Al-Mamun said: "O Abu al-Hasan! What is your opinion regarding what they argue
about?"
The Imam (AS) said:
O Sulayman! How could you not believe in appearance while Allah, the Mighty and
High, said: But does not man call to mind that We created him before out of nothing?
And the Mighty and High said: It is He who originates the creation, then He causes it to
486

recur again, and says: Originator of the heavens and the earth. Moreover, the Mighty
and High said: He began the creation of man from clay. Also the mighty and High says:
And others are mate to await Allah's Command, whether He will chastise them, or turn
in mercy to them. And the Mighty and High says: None ages, nor any diminishes from
one's life except what is in a Book.
Sulayman asked, "Has anything been narrated to you on this issue from your
forefathers?"
The Imam (AS) said:
Yes. It has been narrated on the authority of Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) who said:
Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, possesses two types of knowledge: a Guarded or
Hidden Knowledge, which no one knows but He. Appearance is rooted in that
knowledge. And He possesses a second type of knowledge which he has taught to His
Angels (AS) and his Messengers (AS), and which the learned members of the
Household of the Prophet (AS) also know.
Sulayman saiwould like you to present this from the Book of Allah, the mighty and
High."
The Imam (AS) said:
That is the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High to His Prophet (SA0: So turn you back
upon them for you are not to be blamed. Allah first intended to destroy them, then it
appeared for Allah so He said: And remind them, for verily reminding avails the
believers.
Sulayman said: "May I be your ransom! Tell me more."
Then al-Rida (AS) said:
My father (AS) informed me on the authority of his forefathers (AS) that the Messenger
of Allah (SA) said:
Verily, Allah, the Mighty and High, revealed to one of His Prophets to let one of the
kings know that I will take away his life at such and such a time. The Prophet went to
see the King and told him that. Then the King pleaded to Allah, while he was on his until
he fell off of it. He said: "O Lord! Postpone m demise until I see my son grow up to
undertake my affairs." Then Allah, the Mighty and High, revealed to that Prophet, "Go to
that king and inform him that I have decided to postpone his death. I have added fifteen
years to his life." The Prophet said: "O Lord! You know very well that I have never lied."
Then Allah, the Mighty and High, revealed to him, "Verily, you are a servant ordained.
Therefore, announce this to him. Allah is never questioned about what He does."
Then the Imam (AS) turned towards Sulayman and saithink you have the same
opinion as the Jews in this regard."
Sulayman saiseek refuge in Allah from such a thing. What have the Jews said?"
The Imam (AS) said:
The Jews say, God's hand is tied up. They mean that Allah has finished working, is
sitting back, and does not create anything else. However, Allah, the Mighty and High,
has given them the following answer: Be their hands tied up, and be they cursed for
what they say. I have also heard a group of people asking my father Musa ibn Jafar
(AS) about appearance, so he said: "What do the people refute from the appearance,
while Allah mighty delay the affairs of some people for a decision regarding them?"
Sulayman asked, "can you tell me for what has the following verse been revealed?
Verily, We have revealed this (Qur'an) in the Night of Power.
The Imam (AS) said: "O Sulayman! Allah, the Mighty and High, decides the destiny for
that year including life or death, good or evil, and sustenance on the Night of Power.
Whatever He destines on that night comes to be."
Sulayman said: "Now I understand. May I be your ransom! Please tell me more."
The Imam (AS) said:
487

O Sulayman! Some of the affairs are up to Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, and what He
wills. He can expedite what He wills, and delay what He wills. O Sulayman, Ali (AS)
used to say, "Knowledge is of two types: Knowledge which Allah has taught His Angels
and His Messengers, and knowledge which He has hidden, and of which none of His
Creation is aware. What Allah has taught His Angels and His Messengers will be done,
for He does not belie Himself, His Angels or His Messengers. It is through His Hidden
Knowledge that He expedites or delays what He wills, removes what He wills, and
asserts what He wishes to assert.
Sulayman told al-Mamun, "O Commander of the Faithful! Allah willing, from this day on
I will not refute or deny the doctrine of appearance."
Al-Mamun said: "O Sulayman! Ask Abu al-Hasan whatever you wish. Just listen
carefully and be fair."
Sulayman said: "O my Mater! May I question you?"
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Ask whatever you wish."
Sulayman said, "What is your view about someone who considers the Divine Will to be
a name or an attribute like the Ever-Living,' the All-Hearing,' the All-Seeing,' and the
Omnipotent'?"
Al-Rida (AS) replied,
You claim that things have emerged and become different because He so willed and
intended. However, you do not say that things have emerged and become different,
because He is All-Hearing and All-Seeing. This is a proof that they (i.e. Will and Intent)
are not similar to attributes such as the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing, and the Omnipotent.
Sulayman saie has always been an Intender."
The Imam (AS) answered him, "O Sulayman! Is His Intent something other than Him?"
He replied, "Yes."
The Imam (A) said: "Then you have proved that there has always been something
alongwith Him forever."
Sulayman said: "No. I have not."
Al-Rida (AS) saias intent emerged?"
Sulayman said: "No. It has not emerged."
Then al-Mamun shouted at him and said: "O Sulayman! Are you showing obstinacy,
and giving vague answers to such a person as him. You must be fair. Do not you see
that you are surrounded by intellectuals?" Then he said: "O Abu al-Hasan! Continue
your speech, since he is the theologian of Khurasan."
So the Imam (AS) repeated his question, "O Sulayman! Has it (the intent) emerged? For
verily, if a thing is not sempiternal, then it has emerged, and if it has not emerged, then
it is sempiternal."
Sulayman saiis Intent is from Him just as His Hearing, His Seeing and His
Knowledge are from Him."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "then is He the same as His Intent?"
Sulayman answered, "No."
The Imam (AS) said: "Therefore, the intender is not like the hearing and the seeing."
Sulayman said: "surely, He intended Himself, in the same way that He heard Himself,
that He was Himself, and that He knew Himself."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "What is the meaning of He intended Himself? Did He intend to be a
Thing? Did He intend to be All-Living, All-Hearing, All-Seeing or All-Powerful?"
Sulayman said: "Yes."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Did that occur through His Intent?"
Sulayman answered, "No."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Then your statement, He intended to be All-Living, All-Hearing, and
All-Seeing' does not make any sense, since they were not done through His Intent."
Sulayman said: "Yes. That was through His Intent."
488

Then al-Mamun and the people around him, burst into laughter. Al-Rida (AS) laughed
as well and said: "Do not be too hard on the theologian from Khurasan. O Sulayman!
Do you think that He has altered from state to state, and changed due to it? This is
something by which Allah, the Mighty and High, cannot be described."
Sulayman remained silent.
Al-Rida (AS) said: "O Sulayman! May I ask you a question?"
The Imam (AS) said: "Tell me about you and your companions: Do you debate with the
people on theology according to what you understand and know or according to what
you do not understand and do not know?"
Sulayman said: "Yes! According to what w understand and know."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "What the people know is that the intender is different from the
intent. The intender exists before the intent. The subject is before the object. This
disproves y our statement, The intender and the intended are the same thing.'"
Sulayman said: "May I be your ransom! This is not what the people know about and
understand."
Al-Rida (AS) saithink you have claimed to have knowledge without understanding
it. You have said: Intending is like hearing and seeing' while this view is not based on
knowledge and intellect."
Sulayman could not answer.
Then Al-Rida (AS) said: "O Sulayman! Does Allah, the Mighty and High, have
knowledge of all that is in Paradise and the Fire?"
Sulayman said: "Yes."
\The Imam (AS) saif Allah, the Mighty and High, knows that something will be
created in the future, will He actually create it?"
Sulayman answered, "Yes."
The Imam (AS) saif it is done to the extent that nothing else remains, can He add
more to it or will He stop doing so?"
Sulayman saie will add to them."
The Imam (AS) said: "then based on what you have said: He adds to them what He did
not know would be crated."
He responded, "May I be your ransom! There is no limit for adding."
The Imam (AS) said:
Then in your opinion His Knowledge does not encompass what is in the two (Paradise
and Hell)_, since He does not know the limit of that. IF His Knowledge does not
encompass what is therein, then He would not know what will be there before it existed.
Exalted is Allah, the Elevated and High, from that!
Sulayman said: "When I said he does not know about them, it was because they have
no limit, and Allah, the Mighty and High, Himself has described them as eternal.
Therefore, we do not want to assume an end for them."
Al-Rida (AS) said:
His Knowledge of them will not limit them. There are many instances of which He has
knowledge, then He adds to them, and does not take away what He has added to them.
These are supported by the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High, in His Book: As often
as their skins are burned away, We will change them for other skins, so that they may
taste the torment.
And the Mighty and High says to the inhabitants of Paradise: An unceasing gift. And
the Mighty and High said: And abundant fruit, neither failing (be season) not forbidden.
Therefore, the High and Mighty knows about these, and does not prevent them from
accessing what is added. Will He not replace what the inhabitants of Paradise eat and
drink?
Sulayman said: "Yes."
489

The Imam (AS) said: "Does the fact that he replaces the consumed food and drink mean
that He has stopped granting?"
Sulayman said: "No."
The Imam (AS) said: "Therefore, when whatever is consume in Paradise, Allah will
replace it with other things. And the inhabitants of paradise will not be prevented from
consuming them."
Sulayman said: "Well. He will limit what is added to them, and he will not give them
anything else."
Al-Rida (AS) said:
Then whatever is in Paradise and hell will end. O Sulayman! This is against eternity and
the Book since Allah, the Mighty and High, says: For them therein shall be whatever
they desire, and with Us is yet eve more. The Mighty and High says: An unceasing gift.
And the Mighty and High says: Not shall they (ever) be asked to leave. And the Mighty
and High says: To abide therein forever. And the Mighty and High says: And abundant
fruit, nether failing (by season) nor forbidden.
Sulayman remained silent. Then al-Rida (AS) said: "O Sulayman, tell me about the
intent: Is it an action or is it not?"
Sulayman sait is an action."
The Imam (AS) said: "therefore, it has emerged, for all actions have emerged."
Sulayman sait is not an action."
The Imam (AS) saias there then been something else with Him that is eternal?"
Sulayman saintending is the same as originating."
The Imam (AS) said:
O Sulayman! This is exactly what you criticized of Dirar and his companions when they
said that everything that Allah, the Mighty and High, has created in the heavens, the
earth, the oceans or on land, such as dogs, pigs, monkeys, humans or animals, forms
part of the Intent of Allah, the Mighty and High, and that Allah's Intent lives, dies, goes
away, eats , drinks, marries, gives birth, oppresses, commits immoral acts, disbelieves,
and become a polytheist. You denounce this view, and oppose it. This is its limit.
Sulayman said: "The intent is like hearing, seeing, and knowledge."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "You just returned to what you said before. Tell me: are hearing,
seeing and knowledge created?"
Sulayman said: "No."
Al-Rida (AS) asked, "How do you then refute Him? At times you say that He did not
intend. At other times you say that He intended, and that His Intent is not His Action?"
Sulayman said: "Surely, that is like saying, He sometimes knows, and sometimes does
not know!"
Al-Rida (AS) said:
That is not the same, for negating the known is not like negating knowledge. However,
negating the intended is negating the intent, for if the thing is not intended, there will be
no intent. However, sometimes there is knowledge, but there may be no known thing.
This is like seeing. Man may be able to see, but there may be nothing there for him to
see. Likewise, there may be knowledge, while there is nothing to be known.
Sulayman said: "the intent is created."
The Imam (AS) said: "Therefore, it has emerged, and is not like hearing and seeing, for
hearing and seeing are not created, and the intent is created."
Sulayman said: "The Intent is one of His Eternal Attributes."
The Imam (AS) answered, "Therefore, man must be eternal, for his attribute is eternal."
Sulayman said: "No, because He has not carried out of the intent."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "O Khurasani! How often you make mistakes! Are things not made
according to His Intent and His Words?"
Sulayman said: "No."
490

The Imam (AS) said:
If things are not made according to His Intent or Will, nor His Command or His Practice,
then how are they made? Exalted is Allah from that!" Sulayman could not respond.
Then al-Rida (AS) asked, "Will you not tell me about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: When We intend to destroy a town, We send Our commandment to those of its
people who lead easy lives (to obey Us), and yet they transgress in it. By this We
intend' He means that He emerges the intent?"
Sulayman said to him, "Yes."
The Imam (AS) replied to him, "If He crates the intent, then your statement that the
intent is He Himself or is a part of Him is futile, for it is not possible that He emerged
Himself as His State never changes. Exalted is Allah from that!"
Sulayman asked, "Does He not mean by that that He caused the intent to emerge?"
The Imam (AS) asked, "What would He man by that?"
Sulayman saie means doing something."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Woe unto you! How many times have you repeated this issue? I
have told you that the intent is emerged, since the action of a thing is emerged."
Sulayman said: "Then this has no meaning."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Do you then think that He describes Himself with intent which has
no meaning? If the intent has no eternal or emerged meaning, then that will nullify your
statement, Allah has always been the Intender."
Sulayman saimeant to say that the intent is one of the Eternal Actions of Allah."
The Imam (AS) said; "Do you know the eternal cannot be created or emerged and
eternal simultaneously?"
Sulayman could not answer. Al-Rida (AS) continued, "Never mind! Complete your
questions."
Sulayman said: "Did you say that intent is one of His Attributes?"
Al-Rida (AS) said; "How many times will you repeat that the intent is one of His
Attributes. Are His Attributes emerged or are they eternal?"
Sulayman said: "they are emerged."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Allah is the Greatest! You are telling me that the intent in emerged,
even though it is one of His Eternal Attributes. Therefore, He has not intended
anything!" The Imam (AS) added, Whatever is eternal is not created."
Sulayman said: "Things are not the same as the intent, and He did not intend anything."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "O Sulayman! Are you suggesting that He created what He did not
intend to create? This is an attribute of someone who does not know what he is doing.
Exalted is Allah from that!"
Sulayman said: "O my Master! I have already informed you that the intent is like
hearing, seeing and knowing."
Al-Mamun said: "O Sulayman! Woe unto you! How often have you erred, and how often
have you repeated yourself! Cease and address another issue since you seem unable
to provide a proper answer."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "O Commander of the Faithful! Leave him alone! Do not interrupt his
questions, since then he will regard it as an argument (against me). O Sulayman!
Speak."
Sulayman saihave already informed you that the intent is like hearing, seeing and
knowing."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Never mind! Tell me whether the intent has one meaning or several
meanings."
Sulayman sait has one meaning."
Al-Rida (AS) sais the meaning of all the intents then the same?"
Sulayman said: "Yes."
Al-Rida (AS) said:
491

If its meanings are the same, then it must be that the intent to stand up is the same as
the intent to sit down, or that the intent to live is the same as the intent to die. If His
Intent is all one thing, then none of His Desires will take precedence over any others.
None will be any different from any others. They will all be one thing.
Sulayman replied, "Surely, the meanings are different."
The Imam (AS) said: "Then, tell me about the Intender. Is it the same as the intent or is
it something else?"
Sulayman said: "Yes. It is the same as the intent."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Then according to you the intender is something else, since it is the
same as the intent."
Sulayman said: "O my Master! The intent is not the same as the intender."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Then the intent is emerged. Otherwise, it must be that something
else existed along with Him. Understand this well, and continue on with your
questions."
Sulayman said: "The intent is one of His Names."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Did He give Himself that name?"
Sulayman replied, "No, He did not give Himself that name."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Therefore, you have not right to give Him a name which He did not
give to Himself?"
Sulayman said: "But He has described Himself as the Intender."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "the fact that He has described Himself as the Intender does not
mean that He wanted to inform us that He is the Intent, or that the Intent is one of His
Names."
Sulayman said: "that is because His Intent is the same as His Knowledge."
AlRida (AS) said: "O ignorant man! If He knows something, does that not mean that He
has intended it?"
Sulayman said: "Yes."
The Imam (AS) asked, "However, if He does not intent something, does that mean that
He does not know it?"
Sulayman said: "Yes."
The Imam (AS) said:
What is your source for that statement? What proof do you have that His Intent is the
same as His Knowledge? He may know something, but never intent it. This is
supported by His Word the Mighty and High: If We wished, We would certainly take
away that which We revealed to you. He knows how to take it away, but He never will.
Sulayman said: "That is because He has finished administering the affairs of creation,
and will not add anything to what He has destined."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "this is what the Jews say. Then how has the Mighty and High said:
Call unto Me; I will answer you.
Sulayman saie means that He has the power to do so."
The Imam (AS) said:
Does He make a promise that He will not fulfill? And if so, then why has He said that He
adds to creation whatever He wills. And the Mighty and High said: Allah effaces (of it)
whatever He pleases, and confirms (what He wi9lls); with Him is the mother of the
Book. Has He finished administering the affairs of creation?"
Sulayman could not answer. Al-Rida (AS) said: "O Sulayman! Does He know that a
human being will come into existence, while He does not intend to create a human
being ever again? Can a person die today, while He does not intend for him to die
today?"
Sulayman said: "Yes."
492

Al-Rida (AS) asked, "Does He know what He intends exists? And does He know that
what He has not intended does not exist?"
Sulayman saie knows that both of them exist."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Therefore, He knows that man is simultaneously alive and dead, is
standing and sitting, is blind and seeing. This is impossible."
Sulayman said: "May I be your ransom! He knows that one of them will exist."
The Imam (AS) said: "Do not worry. Which one will exist? The one which He intended or
the one which He did not intended?"
Sulayman said: "The one He intended will exist!"
Al-Rida (AS), al-Mamun, and the scholars started to laugh.
Al-Rida (AS) said:
You have erred and strayed from your initial argument that He knows that some people
will die today, while He has not intended to make them die today, and that He creates
creatures, while He does not intend to created them.' If you hold that knowledge does
not apply to what He has not intended, then He alone know what He has intended.
Sulayman said; "My statement is that the intent is neither Him nor something other than
Him!"
Al-Rida (AS) said: "O ignorant man! If you say that He is separate from His Intent, then
you are saying that His Intent is something other than Him. If you say that He is not
separate from His Intent, then you have regarded His Intent equal to Him."
Sulayman asked, "Does He know hoe He creates things?"
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Yes."
Sulaymand said: "surely this establishes something."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "what you have said is impossible because a man may know how to
build a wall without building a wall; a man may know how to sew without sewing
anything; or a man may know how t do something well without making it.
Then al-Rida (AS) added, "O Sulayman! Does He know that He is One without anything
with Him?"
Sulayman replied, "Yes."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "Does this establish something?"
Sulayman saie does not know that He is One without anything with Him."
Al-Rida (AS) asked, "Do you know that?"
Sulayman replied, "Yes."
Al-Rida (AS) said: "O Sulayman! Therefore, you are more knowledgeable than Him!"
Sulayman said: "This is impossible."
The Imam (AS) sais it impossible in your view that He is One without anything with
Him, that He is All-Hearing, All-Seeing, All-Wise, All-Knowing, and All-Powerful?"
He replied, "Yes."
The Imam (AS) said:
Then how did Allah, the Mighty and High, inform that He is One, Ever-Living, AllHearing, All-Seeing, All-Knowing, All-Aware, if He did not know that? This rejects and
belies what He has said. Exalted is Allah from that!"
Then Al-Rida (AS) asked him, "How does He intend to make something He does not
know how to make? If a creator does not know how to create something before he
creates it, then he is perplexed. Exalted is Allah from that!
Sulayman saintent is the same as Omnipotence."
Al-Rida (AS) said:
He, the Mighty and High, has power over what He does not intend. There is no escape
from that for He, the Blessed and Exalted, said: If it were Our Will, We could take away
that which We have sent by inspiration. If intent is the same as omnipotence, He had
intend to take it away for His Omnipotence.
493

Sulayman remained silent. At this time Al-Mamun said: "O Sulayman! This is the most
learned of the Hashimites!" Then the people dispersed.
The Compiler of this book says: Al-Mamun was bringing together theologians of various
schools of Islam and other religions who had deviated from the Straight Path, in an attempt to
embarrass al-Rida and defeat him in debate. This was motivated by al-Mamun's jealousy of
him, and due to the stature that al-Ridas (AS) knowledge gave him.
However, all those who debated with him (AS) ended up acknowledging his nobi9lity, and
were convinced by the proofs presented by the Imam (AS). This was because Allah, Exalted
by His Remembrance, honored His Word, accomplished His Light and assisted His Proof. This
is what the Blessed and Exalted has promised in His Book: Verily, We help Our messengers
and those who believe in the life of this world, by those who believe,' He mean the
Immaculate Imams (AS), their followers, those who recognize them, and those who acquire
knowledge from them. He assists them with proofs against their rivals for as long as they are
in this world. He will treat them likewise in the Hereafter. Verily, Allah does not act against His
Promise.

494

Chapter Sixty-Seven: Al-Nahian al-Kalam wa al-Jidal wa al-Mira'fi
Alalh. The Prohibition of Discussing, Debating, and Arguing about
Allah - 35 traditions

1. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa, on the
authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of Ali ibn Ra'ab, on the authority of Abu
Basir that

.Z C 3 H G " G G G7 H G (R) G G7 H 3 G G G7 H 3 }

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: "Discuss the creation of Allah, but refrain from
discussing about Allah. Verily, discussing about Allah causes nothing but confusion."
2. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the
authority of Abu Ayyub al-Khazzaz, on the authority of Abu Ubaydah, that

.G G7 H 3 E 4 _ G7 H 3 : % H E} G
Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: "Discuss about anything, but do not discuss about
Allah."
3. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the
authority Ali ibn Ri'ab, on the authority of Durays al-Kanasi, that
Abu Jafar al-Bair (AS) said:

o

3 G G G G o

"Mention Allah's Greatness as you wish, but do not discuss His Essence, as He is
greater than anything you many mention."
4. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the
authority of Ali ibn Ri'ab on the authority of Burayd al-Ijli that

G G 2
H o

.n

495

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: The Messenger of Allah (SA) joined a gathering of
his companions, and asked them: "Why have you gathered?" They replied: "We have
gathered to mention our Lord and to ponder upon His Greatness."
Thus, the Prophet (SA) said; "You will never be able to understand His Greatness."
5. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the
authority of Ali ibn ibn Ri'ab, on the authority of Fudayl ibn Yasir that

% G 2 m G O 2 $ m G G2 L G

H >

G >
. I I G 3
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
O son of Adam! If a bird ate you heart, it would not fill him. If your eye was placed with a
hole of a needle it would certainly be covered. And yet you seek to understand the
heavens and the earth by means of your heart and your eyes? If what you claim is
correct, namely, that you can understand Allah, then here is the sun, a creation from
the creations of Allah, If your eyes can stand the sight of it, then what you say is true.
6. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the
authority of al-Ala' ibn Razin, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim, that

>
2

G >
G >
.C G m H I Z G C G #
G G7 I % G Z G H

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) was asked about the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High: And
whoever is blind in this, he shall (also) be blind in the hereafter; and more erring from
the way. He (AS) said: He who is guided by the creation of the heavens and the earth,
and the alteration of the night and the day, and the sailing of the ships, and the sun and
the moon, and all the other amazing signs of Allah, should know that there is
something Greater behind them all. He shall be blind in the Hereafter, and the fartheset
from the straight path. He (AS) added, "In other words, he is blind and led astray, form
what he does not see."
7. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa said, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn
Fuddal, on the authority of Thalabah ibn Maymun, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn al-Sayqal,
on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim, that

G G7 H 3 Z H G (R)

496

G G%G G G%G G q

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said:
Discuss about anything but the Throne. And discuss about anything other than what is
above the Throne. A group once conversed about the Essence of Allah, the Mighty and
High. They became so bewildered that when someone called one of them from in front,
he would answer from behind, when someone called on of them from behind, they
would answer from in front (meaning he lost his sense).
8. My father (RA) said: Ali ibn Ibrahim said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Khathami, on the authority of
Abd al-Rahim al-Qasir that

G G H G 4 E} L d
.
I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) something about Divine Unity. He lifted his hands up to
Heaven and saixalted is Allah, the Supreme [Jabbar]. Verily, whoever speculates
about Divine Unity will be destroyed."
9. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the
authority of Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj, on the authority of Sulayman ibn Khalid that

. G d H H G G!" G " _ !G" H H H G G G 7 G G 2 G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) was asked to interpret the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
High: And that to your Lord is the end of all. He saif the statement ends with Allah,
the Mighty and High, then abstain."
10. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the
authority of Abu Ayyub al-Khazzaz, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that

H G " % G " G G G (R) G G7 H H G G IG
H H G " H G G 2

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"O Muhammad! Always use logic with the people until they start discussing the
Essence of Allah. When you hear them talking about that say: There is no got but Allah,
the One, and nothing whatsoever is like unto Him."

497

11. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Humran, on the authority of Abu Ubaydah al-Hadhdha' that

O I 2G G3 G 2 3 H

I ^ H G 2 G%G _ G 3 G

m G G

G (R) H H H G G!"
G G%G G a G%G G q

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (A)S said:
O Ziyad! Beware of quarrels. Verily, its legacy is doubt and the loss of good deeds. A
quarrelling person gets ruined. It may be that he talks about something for which he
will not be forgiven. Verily, he may become lie the people of the past, who avoided the
knowledge they were given, thinking that their knowledge would suffice. Their speech
ended with Allah, the Mighty and High. Thus, they became so much bewildered that
when a man was called from the front, he would answer from behind, and if he was
called from behind, he would answer from in front.
12. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Isa said, on the
authority Abd Allah ibn al-Mughayrah, on the authority of Abu al-Yas, on the authority of
Sulayman ibn Khalid that

H G 2 G%G G G _ G 3 2

H H d H G%G G G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
Verily, there was a group of people before you cast aside the knowledge they were
granted, and sought knowledge that was not granted to them. Hence, they did not stop
questioning until they asked about what was above Heaven. As a result, they went
astray. Among them was a man who, when called from the front, would answer from
behind, and when was called from behind he would answer from the front.

13. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of Abut al-Yas, on the authority
of Abu al-Jarud that

% G 3 ! 2 3

.
2 % 2 3
498

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: "Abandon speculating about Allah. Verily, speculating
about Allah does nothing but lead astray. Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, cannot be
perceived by vision, and the reports cannot reach Him."
14. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of Abu al-Yas, on the authority
of Sulayman ibn Khalid that

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Be ware of speculation about Allah. Verily,
speculation about Allah does nothing but lead astray. Allah, the Mighty and high,
cannot be perceived by vision, and He cannot be attributed with measure."
15. My father (RA) said: Abd Allah ibn Jafar al-Himyari said, on the authority of Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa that Muhammad ibn Khalid said, on the authority of Ali ibn al-Numan
and Safwan ibn Yahya, on the authority of Fudayl ibn Uthman, that

G H G G G% : G G2 G

.H H G C G G " HG(R) Y

A group of people entered the presence of Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) talking about
the Lordship. He (AS) told them: "Fear Allah, revere Him and do not say what we do not
say, for verily, if you say one thing, and we say another, then you will die and so shall
we. Then Allah will raise you from death, and as He will raise us. Thus, you would be
the way He wills, and so shall we."
16. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Abd Allah ibn Jafar said Ahmad ibn
Muhammad ibn Isa said: al-Hasan ibn Mahbub said, on the authority of Amr ibn Abu alMiqdam, on the authority of Salim ibn Abu Hafsah, on the authority of Mundhar al-Thawri, that
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyah said:

.H 3 H GI 3 H G G H G " : GH G G G H
"Verily, this Ummah will not be ruined until they stat discussing (the nature of) their

17. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the
authority of Ali ibn Ri'ab, on the authority of Durays al-Kunasi that

. Z I 3 H G " G G7 H G (R) G%G H 3 H 3 G G G 2
499

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Beware of discussing about Allah. Discuss His
Reverence, but do not discuss is Essence. Verily, discussing Allah does nothing but
lead astray.
18. Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Imran al-Daqqaq (RA) said: Abu al-Husayn
Muhammad ibn Abu Abd Allah al-Kufi said: Muhammad ibn Sulayman ibn al-Hasan al-Kufi
said: Abd Allah ibn Muhammad bin Khalid said, on the authority of Ali ibn Hasan al-Wasiti, on
the authority of some of our scholars, on the authority of Zurarah that

H n

. G
G H 3 _ !G" H m H

I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS): "Verily, the people in our presence are talking
increasingly about the attributes of Allah. What should we say?
So, he (AS) replied, "It is abhorred [makruh]. Do you not hear Allah, the Mighty and
High, saying that And that to your Lord is the end of all. Speak about other than that."
19. My father said: Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim said, on the authority of his father, on the
authority of Ibn Abu Umayr, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn Bukayr, on the authority of
Zurarah, that

G ! 2 3 H % E G G7

Z G H G " : G G2 G
.

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said:
"Verily, there was once a great king started to discuss the Essence of the Lord, Blessed
and Exalted be He. As a result, he went missing, and it is not know what became of him.
20. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn Abd al-Hamid said, on the
authority of alAla' ibn Razin, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim, that

.G%G G G G!" G G G!" 3 3 G " G G G7 n

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: "Beware of speculating about Allah. However, if you
intend to see Allah's magnificence, then look towards the magnificence of His Creation.
21. My father (RA) said: Ahmad ibn Idris said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Ali ibn al-Sindi, on the authority of Hammad ibn Isa, on the authority of alHusayn ibn al-Mukhtar, on the authority of Abu Basir, that

H G 3 G 2 3
_ 3 m % G E} G E G G

Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said: I heard him saying that, "Quarrelling destroys religion,
puts an end to good deeds, and leaves nothing but doubt as its heir."
500

22. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of Abu Basir that

G I G G 2 E G G

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The quarrelers are ruined while the submitters are
saved. Verily, the submitters are the noble ones."
23. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said: al-Abbas ibn Maruf said, on the authority of Sadan ibn Muslim, on the authority
of Abu Basir that

.

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The only ones who quarrel in matters of faith are
those who lack piety or who are assailed by doubts."
24. My father (RA) said: Abd Allah ibn Jafar al-Himyari said: Ahmad ibn Muhammad sid, on
the authority of Ali ibn al-Hakam, on the authority of Fudayl, on the authority of Abu Ubaydah
who said that

H G H 3 G%G G G G 3

. G G G7 I H G G G H G G m H Z G G H
Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS) said to me: O Abu Ubaydah! Beware of quarrelers and those
who relate lies about us. Verily, they have left what they were ordered to learn and seek
from the knowledge of Heaven. O Abu Ubaydah! Mould people with morals and pursue
them with their deeds. Verily, we never consider a person to be wise until he recognizes
the tone of speech. He (AS) then recited this verse: And most certainly you can
recognize them by the tone of (their) speech.
25. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Yaqub ibn Yazid said, on the authority of alGhifari, on the authority of Jafar ibn Ibrahim, that

E H H G (R) E _ G HG" G % H G G 2 G G G" G }

d % G % G GH G % G %
% 3H L Y G (R) G%G3H G G Y G!" % H
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: The Messenger of Allah (SA) said:
"Beware of arguing wit every maniac. Verily, every maniac dictates his proof till the end
of his time (death). When his life cameos to an end, his mischief will cause him to burn
in the fire." It is also transmitted, his mistakes trouble him and burn him.'
501

26. My father (RA) said: Sa1d ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn Isa said

G7G G I I H G O$ G % H G G m H d % H E G G _ G

G%G H G H d G%G H G G H G" % H dG

.G%G Y G % G " H G (R) G%G H G G G q H d3 G I %

I read in the letter of Ali ibn Bilal that he asked the man, i.e. Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim
(AS), regarding the prohibition of discussing matters of religion which were transmitted
from his ancestors. Your followers [mawali] have interpreted the speakers' to mean
that those who are not well-versed about a topic are prohibited from speaking about it
and that whoever is well-versed about a topic is not prohibited from speaking about it.
Is this the way you interpret it or not?
Thus, he (AS) wrote: "...neither the well-versed nor the ignorant should speak about it,
for indeed, its sin is greater than its benefit."
27. My father (RA) said: Ahmad ibn Idris said; Muhammad ibn Ahmad said, on the authority of
Ali ibn Ismail, on the authority of al-Mualla ibn Muhammad ibn al-Basri, on the authority of
Ali ibn Asbar, on the authority of Jafar ibn Samaah, on the authority of more than one, on
the authority of Zurarah that

G G m

m m G 2G G H }
.
m
I asked Abu Jafar al-Baqir (AS): "What is the proof of Allah over the servants?"
He (AS) answered, "They should only say what they know, and refrain from saying what
they know not."
28. My father (RA) said: Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Attar said, on the authority of Muhammad
ibn al-Husayn ibn Abu al-Khattab, on the authority of Ibn Fuddal, on the authority of Ali ibn
Shajarah, on the authority of Ibrahim ibn Abu Raja', on the authority of Tirbal's brother that

C m G G 2 L G
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Abstaining from annoying (others with arguments)
and desisting from shouting increase one's sustenance."
29. Muhammad ibn Musa ibn al-Mutawakkil (RA) said: Abd Allah ibn Jafar al-Himyani said:
Muhammad ibn al-Husayn said, on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub, on the authority of
Najiyyah al-Qawwas, on the authority of Ali ibn Yaaqtin that

502

_ G7 G IG G G C G
H G G 2G G7 G I

Abu al-Hasan al-Kazim (AS) saiuide your friends to hold their tongues, abandon
religious quarrel, and strive to serve Allah, the Mighty and High."
30. Al-Husayn ibn Ahmad ibn Idris (RA) said, on the authority of his father, on the authority of
Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on the authority of Musa ibn Umar, on the authority of al-Abbas ibn
Amir, on the authority of Muthanna, on the authority of Abu Baisr, that

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "the only ones who quarrel are those who are
assailed with doubts or who are devoid of piety."
31. And with the same chain of transmission, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad on the
authority of Ahmad ibn al-Hasan, on the authority of Abu Hafs Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz, on the
authority of a man, that

_ G GG G G _ : G G 2 G
. E G _ G % G (c)
Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The debaters of this sect are the most evil of all the
categories."
32. My father (RA) said: Sad ibn Abd Allah said: Muhammad ibn al-Husayn said, on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail, on the authority of al-Hadrami, on the authority of alMufaddal ibn Umar that

.

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "O Mufaddal! Whoever speculates about the state of
Allah is ruined, and whoever seeks power is ruined as well."
33. My father (RA) said: Abd Allah ibn Jafar al-Himyari said, on the authority of Harun ibn
Muslim, on the authority of Musadah ibn Sadaqah, on the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad
(AS), on the authority of his father (AS) that

.G G2 G H G G G G m Z I G 3H
G H : H G H H G%G
The Prophet (SA) said: "allah has cursed the ones who cheapen religion. They are
those who quarrel for the sole purpose of refuting truth with falsehood."

503

34. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn al-Walid (RA) said: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan alSaffar said, on the authority of al-Fadl ibn Amir, on the authority of Musa bin al-Qasim alBajali, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Said, on the authority of Ismail ibn Abu Ziyad, on
the authority of Jafar ibn Muhammad (AS) on the authority of his forefathers (AS) that

The Messenger of Allah (SA) saiam the leader of the Highest House in Paradise,
the leader of the Medium House in Paradise, and the leader of the House in the Garden
of Paradise, for all those who refrain from vain argument, even when they are correct.
35. My father (RA) said: Ahmad ibn Idris said, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ahmad, on
the authority of Abd Allah ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Muhammad ibn Ismail alNaysaburi, on the authority of Abd al-Rahman ibn Abu Hashim, on the authority of Kulayb ibn
Muawiyah that

Abu Abd Allah al-Sadiq (AS) said: "No one quarrels except for the one whose chest is
narrowed."

504

